PsychologicalSafety                            This paper presents a model of team learning and tests it
and LearningBehavior                           in a multimethod field study. It introduces the construct
in WorkTeams                                   of team psychological safety-a shared belief held by
                                               members of a team that the team is safe for interper-
                                               sonal risk taking-and models the effects of team psy-
Amy Edmondson                                  chological safety and team efficacy together on learning
Harvard University                             and performance in organizational work teams. Results
                                               of a study of 51 work teams in a manufacturing com-
                                               pany, measuring antecedent, process, and outcome vari-
                                               ables, show that team psychological safety is associated
                                               with learning behavior, but team efficacy is not, when
                                               controlling for team psychological safety. As predicted,
                                               learning behavior mediates between team psychological
                                               safety and team performance. The results support an in-
                                               tegrative perspective in which both team structures, such
                                               as context support and team leader coaching, and shared
                                               beliefs shape team outcomes.'

                                               A growing relianceon teams in changing and uncertainorga-
                                               nizationalenvironmentscreates a managerialimperativeto
                                               understandthe factors that enable team learning.Although
                                               much has been written about teams and about learningin
                                               organizations,our understandingof learningin teams re-
                                               mains limited.A review of the team effectiveness and orga-
                                               nizationalearningliteraturesreveals markedlydifferentap-
                                               proaches and a lack of cross-fertilizationbetween them. An
                                               emerging literatureon group learning,with theoreticalpapers
                                               on groups as information-processingsystems and a number
                                               of empiricalstudies examininginformationexchange in labo-
                                               ratorygroups, has not investigatedthe learningprocesses of
                                               real work teams (cf. Argote, Gruenfeld,and Naquin,1999).
                                               Althoughmost studies of organizationalearninghave been
                                               field-based, empiricalresearch on group learninghas primar-
                                               ily taken place in the laboratory,and little research has been
                                               done to understandthe factors that influence learningbehav-
                                               ior in ongoing teams in real organizations.
                                               Studies of work teams in a varietyof organizationalsettings
                                               have shown that team effectiveness is enabled by structural
                                               features such as a well-designed team task, appropriate
                                               team composition, and a context that ensures the availability
                                               of information,resources, and rewards (Hackman,1987).
                                               Many researchers have concluded that structureand design,
                                               includingequipment, materials,physicalenvironment,and
                                               pay systems, are the most importantvariablesfor improving
                                               work-teamperformance(Goodman,Devadas, and Hughson,
                                               1988; Campion,Medsker, and Higgs, 1993; Cohen and Led-
                                               ford, 1994) and have argued against focusing on interper-
? 1999 by Cornell University.
                                               sonal factors (e.g., Goodman, RavIin,and Schminke, 1987).
0001 -8392/99/4402-0350/$1 .00.                Accordingto this research, organizationand team structures
                                               explain most of the variancein team effectiveness.
I thank Richard Hackman for extensive
advice and feedback on the design of this      In contrast, organizationalearningresearch has emphasized
study and on several versions of this pa-      cognitive and interpersonalfactors to explaineffectiveness,
per. Keith Murnighan, Rod Kramer, Mark
Cannon, and three anonymous reviewers
                                               showing, for example, that individuals'tacit beliefs about in-
provided feedback that greatly benefited       terpersonalinteractioninhibitlearningbehaviorand give rise
the final version of the paper. I gratefully   to ineffectiveness in organizations(e.g., Argyris,1993). This
acknowledge the Division of Research at
the Harvard Business School for provid-        cognitive emphasis takes differentforms. Organizational
ing financial support for this research.       learningtheorists have offered both descriptivetheory ex-
                                               350/AdministrativeScience Quarterly,44 (1999): 350-383

Psychological Safety

plainingthe failureof organizationsto adapt rationallydue to
cognitive biases that favor existing routines over alternatives
(e.g., Levittand March,1988) and prescriptivetheory propos-
ing interventionsthat alter individuals'"theories-in-use"to
improveorganizationeffectiveness (e.g., Argyrisand Schdn,
1978). The formertheorists suggest that adaptive learningin
social systems is fundamentallyproblematicand rare,and
the latter,only slightlymore sanguine, propose that expert
interventionis necessary to bringit about (cf. Edmondson
and Moingeon, 1998). This paper takes a differentapproach
to understandinglearningin organizationsby examiningto
what extent and underwhat conditions learningoccurs natu-
rallyin organizationalwork groups.
Much organizationalearningresearch has reliedon qualita-
tive studies that providerichdetail about cognitive and inter-
personal processes but do not allow explicit hypothesis test-
ing (e.g., Senge, 1990; Argyris,1993; Watkinsand Marsick,
1993). Manyteam studies, in contrast, have used large
samples and quantitativedata but have not examined ante-
cedents and consequences of learningbehavior(e.g., Good-
man, Devadas, and Hughson, 1988; Hackman,1990; Cohen
and Ledford,1994). I propose that to understandlearning
behaviorin teams, team structuresand shared beliefs must
be investigatedjointly,using both quantitativeand qualitative
methods.
This paper presents a model of team learningand tests it in
a multimethodfield study. The results support an integrative
perspective in which both team structures, such as context
supportand team leader coaching, and shared beliefs shape
team outcomes. Organizationalwork teams are groups that
exist within the context of a largerorganization,have clearly
defined membership,and share responsibilityfor a team
productor service (Hackman,1987; Alderfer,1987). Their
learningbehaviorconsists of activities carriedout by team
members throughwhich a team obtains and processes data
that allow it to adapt and improve. Examplesof learningbe-
haviorinclude seeking feedback, sharinginformation,asking
for help, talkingabout errors,and experimenting.It is
throughthese activities that teams can detect changes in
the environment,learnabout customers' requirements,im-
prove members' collective understandingof a situation,or
discover unexpected consequences of their previousactions.
These useful outcomes often go unrealizedin organizations.
Members of groups tend not to share the unique knowledge
they hold, such that group discussions consist primarilyof
jointlyheld information(Stasser and Titus, 1987), posing a
dilemma for learningin groups. More centrally,those in a
position to initiatelearningbehaviormay believe they are
placingthemselves at risk;for example, by admittingan er-
roror asking for help, an individualmay appear incompetent
and thus suffer a blow to his or her image. In addition,such
individualsmay incurmore tangible costs if their actions cre-
ate unfavorableimpressions on people who influence deci-
sions about promotions,raises, or projectassignments. Im-
age costs have been explored in research on face saving,
which has established that people value image and tacitly
abide by social expectations to save their own and others'
351/ASQ, June 1999

face (Goffman,1955). Asking for help, admittingerrors,and
seeking feedback exemplify the kinds of behaviorsthat pose
a threat to face (Brown, 1990), and thus people in organiza-
tions are often reluctantto disclose their errors(Michael,
1976) or are unwillingto ask for help (Lee, 1997), even when
doing so would providebenefits for the team or organization.
Similarly,research has shown that the sense of threat
evoked in organizationsby discussing problems limits indi-
viduals'willingness to engage in problem-solvingactivities
(Dutton, 1993; MacDuffie,1997). The phenomenon of threat
rigidityhas been explored at multiplelevels of analysis,
showing that threat has the effect of reducingcognitive and
behavioralflexibilityand responsiveness, despite the implicit
need for these to address the source of threat (Staw, Sand-
elands, and Dutton, 1981). In sum, people tend to act in
ways that inhibitlearningwhen they face the potentialfor
threat or embarrassment(Argyris,1982).
Nonetheless, in some environments,people perceive the
career and interpersonalthreat as sufficientlylow that they
do ask for help, admit errors,and discuss problems. Some
insight into this may be found in research showing that fa-
miliarityamong group members can reduce the tendency to
conform and suppress unusualinformation(Sannaand Shot-
land, 1990); however, this does not directlyaddress the
question of when group members will be comfortablewith
interpersonallythreateningactions. More specifically,in a
recent study of hospitalpatient-careteams, I found signifi-
cant differences in members' beliefs about the social conse-
quences of reportingmedicationerrors;in some teams,
members openly acknowledged them and discussed ways
to avoid their recurrence;in others, members kept their
knowledge of a drug errorto themselves (Edmondson,
1996). Team members' beliefs about the interpersonalcon-
text in these teams could be characterizedas tacit; they
were automatic,taken-for-grantedassessments of the "way
things are aroundhere." Forexample, a nurse in one team
explained matter-of-factly,"Mistakesare serious, because of
the toxicity of the drugs [we use]-so you're never afraidto
tell the Nurse Manager";in contrast, a nurse in another
team in the same hospitalreported, "Youget put on trial!
People get blamed for mistakes . . . you don't want to have
made one." These quotes illustratemarkedlydifferent be-
liefs about the interpersonalcontext; in the first team, mem-
bers saw it as self-evident that speaking up is naturaland
necessary, and in the other, speaking up was viewed as a
last resort.
An aim of the present study was to investigate whether be-
liefs about the interpersonalcontext vary between teams in
the same organization,as well as to examine their effects on
team outcomes. Existingtheories do not address the issue
of how such beliefs may affect learningbehaviorin teams,
instead focusing primarilyon structuralconditionsassociated
with overallteam effectiveness (e.g., Hackman,1987) or on
the skills that must be learned by individualsto enable learn-
ing in difficultinterpersonalinteractions(e.g., Argyris,1982).
Similarly,research on group traininghas focused primarilyon
task knowledge and has paid little attentionto the role of
social knowledge (Levineand Moreland,1991). Thus, the
352/ASQ, June 1999

Psychological Safety

role of beliefs about the interpersonalcontext in individuals'
willingness to engage in otherwise-threateninglearningbe-
haviorhas been largelyunexamined.This is the gap I seek
to fill with a model and study of team learning.

A MODELOF TEAMLEARNING
Team Learning Behavior
Organizationallearningis presented in the literaturein two
differentways: some discuss learningas an outcome; others
focus on a process they define as learning.Forexample,
Levittand March(1988: 320) conceptualizedorganizational
learningas the outcome of a process of organizations"en-
coding inferences from historyinto routinesthat guide be-
havior";in contrast, Argyrisand Sch6n (1978) defined learn-
ing as a process of detecting and correctingerror.In this
paper I join the lattertraditionin treating learningas a pro-
cess and attempt to articulatethe behaviorsthroughwhich
such outcomes as adaptationto change, greater understand-
ing, or improvedperformancein teams can be achieved. For
clarity,I use the term "learningbehavior"to avoid confusion
with the notion of learningoutcomes.
The conceptualizationof learningas a process has roots in
the work of educationalphilosopherJohn Dewey, whose
writingon inquiryand reflection(e.g., Dewey, 1938) has had
considerable influence on subsequent learningtheories (e.g.,
Kolb,1984; Schbn, 1983). Dewey (1922) described learning
as an iterativeprocess of designing, carryingout, reflecting
upon, and modifyingactions, in contrast to what he saw as
the humantendency to rely excessively on habitualor auto-
matic behavior.Similarly,I conceptualize learningat the
group level of analysis as an ongoing process of reflection
and action, characterizedby asking questions, seeking feed-
back, experimenting,reflectingon results, and discussing
errorsor unexpected outcomes of actions. Fora team to dis-
cover gaps in its plans and make changes accordingly,team
members must test assumptions and discuss differences of
opinionopenly ratherthan privatelyor outside the group. I
refer to this set of activities as learningbehavior,as it is
throughthem that learningis enacted at the group level.
This conceptualizationis consistent with a definitionof group
learningproposed recently by Argote, Gruenfeld,and Naquin
(1999) as both processes and outcomes of group interaction
activities throughwhich individualsacquire,share, and com-
bine knowledge, but it focuses on the processes and leaves
outcomes of these processes to be investigated separately.
The management literatureencompasses related discussions
of learning,for example, learningas dependent on attention
to feedback (Schon, 1983), experimentation(Hendersonand
Clark,1990), and discussion of failure(Sitkin,1992; Leonard-
Barton,1995). Research has demonstrated performanceben-
efits for feedback seeking by individualmanagers (Ashford
and Tsui, 1991), for teams seeking informationand feedback
from outside the team (Anconaand Caldwell,1992), and for
research and development teams that experimentfrequently
(Hendersonand Clark,1990). Similarly,because errorspro-
vide a source of informationabout performanceby revealing
353/ASQ, June 1999

that something did not work as planned, the ability to dis-
cuss them productively has been associated with organiza-
tional effectiveness (Michael, 1976; Sitkin, 1992; Schein,
1993). On one hand, if feedback seeking, experimentation,
and discussion of errors individuallypromote effective perfor-
mance, learning behavior-which includes all of these activi-
ties-is also likely to facilitate performance, whether for indi-
viduals or teams. On the other hand, learning behavior
consumes time without assurance of results, suggesting
that there are conditions in which it may reduce efficiency
and detract from performance, such as when teams are re-
sponsible for highly routine repetitive tasks with little need
for improvement or modification. For teams facing change or
uncertainty, however, the risk of wasting time may be small
relative to the potential gain; in such settings, teams must
engage in learning behavior to understand their environment
and their customers and to coordinate members' actions ef-
fectively. Moreover, teams that perform routine production
tasks may still require learning behavior for effective self-
management as a team and for intermittent process im-
provement:
Hypothesis 1 (H1): Learningbehaviorin teams is positivelyassoci-
ated with team performance.
Team Psychological Safety
Team psychological safety is defined as a shared belief that
the team is safe for interpersonal risk taking. For the most
part, this belief tends to be tacit-taken for granted and not
given direct attention either by individuals or by the team as
a whole. Although tacit beliefs about interpersonal norms are
sometimes explicitly discussed in a team, their being made
explicit does not alter the essence of team psychological
safety. The construct has roots in early research on organiza-
tional change, in which Schein and Bennis (1965) discussed
the need to create psychological safety for individuals if they
are to feel secure and capable of changing. Team psycho-
logical safety is not the same as group cohesiveness, as re-
search has shown that cohesiveness can reduce willingness
to disagree and challenge others' views, such as in the phe-
nomenon of groupthink (Janis, 1982), implying a lack of inter-
personal risk taking. The term is meant to suggest neither a
careless sense of permissiveness, nor an unrelentingly posi-
tive affect but, rather, a sense of confidence that the team
will not embarrass, reject, or punish someone for speaking
up. This confidence stems from mutual respect and trust
among team members.
The importance of trust in groups and organizations has long
been noted by researchers (e.g., Golembiewski and Mc-
Conkie, 1975; Kramer, 1999). Trust is defined as the expec-
tation that others' future actions will be favorable to one's
interests, such that one is willing to be vulnerable to those
actions (Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman, 1995; Robinson,
1996). Team psychological safety involves but goes beyond
interpersonal trust; it describes a team climate characterized
by interpersonal trust and mutual respect in which people
are comfortable being themselves.
For team psychological safety to be a group-level construct,
it must characterize the team rather than individual members
354/ASQ, June 1999

Psychological Safety

of the team, and team members must hold similar percep-
tions of it. Previous researchers have studied the similarity
of beliefs in social systems such as organizations and work
groups (for reviews, see Klimoski and Mohammed, 1994;
Walsh, 1995). Perceptions of psychological safety, like other
such beliefs, should converge in a team, both because team
members are subject to the same set of structural influ-
ences and because these perceptions develop out of salient
shared experiences. For example, most members of a team
will conclude that making a mistake does not lead to rejec-
tion when they have had team experiences in which appre-
ciation and interest are expressed in response to discussion
of their own and others' mistakes.
Team psychological safety should facilitate learning behavior
in work teams because it alleviates excessive concern about
others' reactions to actions that have the potential for em-
barrassment or threat, which learning behaviors often have.
For example, team members may be unwilling to bring up
errors that could help the team make subsequent changes
because they are concerned about being seen as incompe-
tent, which allows them to ignore or discount the negative
consequences of their silence for team performance. In con-
trast, if they respect and feel respected by other team mem-
bers and feel confident that team members will not hold the
error against them, the benefits of speaking up are likely to
be given more weight. Support for the centrality of interper-
sonal inferences in groups is found in research on distribu-
tive justice, which shows that people are more focused on
relational than instrumental considerations in their assess-
ments of allocation decisions made by authority figures;
people are very attentive to the tone and quality of social
processes and are more willing to comply with these when
they feel valued (Tyler and Lind, 1992). Argyris and Schdn
(1978) made a connection between interpersonal threat and
learning when they posited that interpersonally threatening
issues impede learning behavior, but they did not address
the possibility that dyads or groups may differ in their tacit
beliefs about interpersonal threat, thereby giving rise to dif-
ferent levels of learning. In contrast, I propose that psycho-
logical safety varies from team to team, such that otherwise
interpersonally threatening learning behavior can occur if the
team has a sufficiently safe environment:
Hypothesis 2 (H2):Team psychologicalsafety is positivelyassoci-
ated with learningbehaviorin organizationalwork teams.
Psychological safety does not play a direct role in the team's
satisfying customers' needs, the core element of perfor-
mance; rather, it facilitates the team's taking appropriate ac-
tions to accomplish its work. Thus, learning behavior should
mediate the effects of team psychological safety on perfor-
mance outcomes:
Hypothesis 3 (H3):Team learningbehaviormediates between
team psychologicalsafety and team performance.
Team Efficacy and Team Learning
Building on earlier work on the role of self-efficacy in en-
hancing individual performance (Bandura, 1982), a body of
research has established   group efficacy as a group-level phe-
355/ASQ, June 1999

nomenon (e.g., Guzzo et al., 1993) and also reporteda rela-
tionship between group efficacy and performance(Lindsley,
Brass, and Thomas, 1995; Gibson, 1996). This work has not
specified mechanisms throughwhich shared perceptions of
efficacy lead to good performance,and one possibilityis that
efficacy fosters team members' confidence, which promotes
learningbehaviorand helps accomplish desired team goals:
Hypothesis 4 (H4):Team efficacy is positivelyassociated with
team learningbehavior.
Team members deciding whether to reveal errorsthey have
made are likelyto be motivatedto speak up if two condi-
tions are satisfied: first, they believe they will not be re-
jected (team psychologicalsafety) and, second, they believe
that the team is capable of using this new informationto
generate useful results (team efficacy).Team psychological
safety and team efficacy are thus complementaryshared
beliefs, one pertainingto interpersonalthreat and the other
characterizingthe team's potentialto perform.Team efficacy
thus should supplement team psychologicalsafety's positive
effect on team learning:
Hypothesis 5 (H5):Team efficacy is positivelyassociated with
team learningbehavior,controllingfor the effects of team psycho-
logicalsafety.
Team Leader Coaching and Context Support as
Antecedents of Team Psychological Safety
A set of structuralfeatures-consisting of a clear compelling
team goal, an enablingteam design (includingcontext sup-
port such as adequate resources, information,and rewards),
along with team leader behaviorssuch as coaching and di-
rection setting-have been shown to increase team effec-
tiveness (Hackman,1987; Wageman, 1998). These structural
features providea startingpoint for examiningantecedents
of team psychologicalsafety. The extent of context support
experienced by a team should be positivelyassociated with
team psychologicalsafety because access to resources and
informationis likelyto reduce insecurityand defensiveness
in a team. Team leader coaching is also likelyto be an im-
portantinfluence on team psychologicalsafety. A team lead-
er's behavioris particularlysalient;team members are likely
to attend to each other's actions and responses but to be
particularlyaware of the behaviorof the leader (Tylerand
Lind,1992). If the leader is supportive,coaching-oriented,
and has non-defensive responses to questions and chal-
lenges, members are likelyto conclude that the team consti-
tutes a safe environment.In contrast, if team leaders act in
authoritarianor punitiveways, team members may be reluc-
tant to engage in the interpersonalrisk involvedin learning
behaviorssuch as discussing errors,as was the case in the
study of hospitalteams mentioned above (Edmondson,
1996). Furthermore,team leaders themselves can engage in
learningbehaviors,demonstratingthe appropriatenessof and
lack of punishmentfor such risks.
Hypothesis 6 (H6):Team leader coaching and context supportare
positivelyassociated with team psychologicalsafety.
Throughenhancing psychologicalsafety, team leader coach-
ing and context supportare likelyto facilitateteam learning.
356/ASQ, June 1999

                                    Psychological   Safety

                                    Team psychologicalsafety thus serves as a mechanism
                                    translatingstructuralfeatures into behavioraloutcomes:
                                    Hypothesis 7 (H7):Team psychologicalsafety mediates between
                                    the antecedents of team leadercoaching and context supportand
                                    the outcome of team learningbehavior.
                                    Context support and team leader coaching should also affect
                                    team efficacy. Effective coaching is likelyto contributeto
                                    members' confidence in the team's abilityto do its job, as is
                                    a supportivecontext, which reduces obstacles to progress
                                    and allows team members to feel confident about their
                                    chances of success. If coaching and context support pro-
                                    mote team efficacy and team efficacy promotes team learn-
                                    ing, this suggests that team efficacy also functions as a me-
                                    diator:
                                    Hypothesis 8 (H8):Team efficacy mediates between the anteced-
                                    ents of team leader coaching and context supportand the outcome
                                    of team learningbehavior.
                                    Team Type
                                    Organizationsuse a varietyof types of teams. Team type
                                    varies across several dimensions, includingcross-functional
                                    versus single-function,time-limitedversus enduring,and
                                    manager-ledversus self-led. These dimensions combine to
                                    form differenttypes of teams, such as a time-limitednew
                                    productdevelopment team or an ongoing self-directedpro-
                                    ductionteam. The team learningmodel should be applicable
                                    across multipletypes of teams, because the social psycho-
                                    logical mechanism at the core of the model concerns people
                                    takingaction in the presence of others, and the salience of
                                    interpersonalthreat should hold across settings. Therefore,
                                    althoughthe utilityof learningbehaviormay varyacross
                                    types of teams, the association between team psychological
                                    safety and team learningbehaviorshould apply across differ-
                                    ent team types. Thus, the effects of team type on learning
                                    behaviorshould be insignificantwhen assessed together
                                    with the other variablesin the team learningmodel, shown
                                    in figure 1. Forexample, new productdevelopment teams
                                    might be expected to exhibit more learningbehaviorthan
                                    productionteams because of the natureof their task; none-
                                    theless, mean differences in learningbehaviorthat might be
                                    observed across types of teams should be explained by
                                    team psychologicalsafety and team efficacy, as shown in
                                    figure 1, ratherthan by team type.

Figure 1. A model of work-team learning.
     Antecedent                  Tea m                         Team
     Conditions                  Beliefs                     Behaviors               Outcomes

                                                         TEAM LEARNING
      TEAM                                                  BEHAVIOR
   STRUCTURES                                                                        TEAM
                                                                                  PERFORMANCE
                             TEAMSAFETY                  Seeking feedback,
  Context support           TEAM EFFICACY                discussing errors,
                                                        seeking information   Satisfies customer needs
    Team leader                                          and feedback from        and expectations
     coaching                                          customers and others




                                    357/ASQ, June 1999

METHODS
To test the hypotheses in the team learning model, I studied
real work teams in an organization that has a variety of team
types, using a combination of qualitative and quantitative
methods to investigate and measure the constructs in the
model. Preliminary observation and interviews in the organi-
zation suggested that there was considerable variation in the
extent to which teams engaged in learning behavior, making
it a good site in which to explore the phenomenon and to
investigate factors associated with team learning.
Research Site and Sample

"Office Design Incorporated" (ODI), a manufacturer of office
furniture with approximately 5,000 employees and a reputa-
tion for product and management innovation, provided the
research site for this study. Teams in this company, imple-
mented in 1979 to promote employee participation and
cross-functional collaboration, consisted of four types. Most
were functional teams, made up of managers or supervisors
and direct reports, and these included sales teams, manage-
ment teams, and manufacturing teams; this type of team
existed within and supported the work of a single functional
department. Although encompassing dyadic reporting rela-
tionships, functional teams had shared goals, and members
were interdependent in reaching them. As with other teams
at ODI, they also typically had some training in teamwork.
Second, ODI had a growing number of self-managed teams
in both manufacturing and sales; these teams consisted of
peers from the same function. The third type was time-lim-
ited cross-functional product development teams, and the
fourth was time-limited cross-functional project teams, con-
vened to work on other projects that involved multiple de-
partments. The company was willing to participate in this
research to obtain feedback on how well its teams were
working.

My primary contact at ODI was a manager in an internal or-
ganization development group who worked closely with me
to facilitate data collection. She scheduled interviews and
meetings, recruited teams to participate in the study, and
identified recipients of the work of each of these teams. As
ODI did not have a central roster of all work teams, she dis-
tributed a memo to managers throughout the company de-
scribing the goal of the study (to assess team effectiveness
at ODI) and asking for lists of teams in their area. This
yielded a list of 53 teams, encompassing differences in orga-
nization level, department, type, size, self- versus leader-
managed, and tenure or team age. At the time of survey
data collection, the oldest team had been together for about
seven years, and the newest had been in place for four
months; both the oldest and newest teams were production
teams. These 53 teams included 34 functional teams (in
sales, manufacturing, and staff services such as information
technology and accounting), nine self-managed teams (in
manufacturing and sales), five cross-functional product devel-
opment teams, and three cross-functional project teams. As
the purpose of the study was to test a theoretical model
rather than to describe properties of this particularorganiza-
358/ASQ, June 1999

Psychological Safety

tion or to characterizeteams of differenttypes, this sample
was not selected to ensure representativeness of the popu-
lationof all teams at ODI,nor were the four subgroups of
team types selected to ensure that they were representative
of each type. The sample did satisfy the essential criterionto
achieve the purposes of this study, however, which was to
include sufficient varianceon the variablesin the model to
test hypothesized relationships.Despite using a process
characterizedby voluntaryparticipationin the research, the
resultingsample was not a self-selected group of high-per-
formingor highlysatisfied teams; instead, there was sub-
stantialvariancefor all variablesstudied, includingfor such
key measures as team psychologicalsafety, learningbehav-
ior, and performance.
Procedure
The study involvedthree phases of data collection. First,I
conducted interviews and observationthat involvedeight
teams, selected from among those availableduringmy two
first visits to ODI,to ensure variancein team type. Second, I
designed and administeredtwo surveys and a structuredin-
terview instrumentto obtain quantitativedata for all teams in
the sample. Third,I interviewedand observed seven teams,
selected accordingto survey results as high or low in learn-
ing behavior.
Phase 1: Preliminary qualitative research. In two four-day
visits to ODI, I observed eight team meetings, each of which
lasted one to three hours, and conducted 17 interviews last-
ing from 45 minutes to an hourwith members or observers
of these eight teams. The eight teams includedfive product
development teams, two management teams, and one self-
managed productionteam. I interviewedat least one and as
many as six members of each team, as well as one senior
manager responsible for reviewingthe work of one of the
productdevelopment teams. The objectives of this phase of
the study were to verifythat the theoreticalconstructs of
team psychologicalsafety and team learningbehaviorcould
be operationalizedat ODIand, if so, to develop survey items
to assess these constructs in language that would be mean-
ingfulin this setting-a modified empathic strategy (Alderfer
and Brown, 1972). In team meetings, I took notes and lis-
tened for examples of learningbehavior,such as asking for
feedback, asking for help, admittingerrors,and proposingor
describinginstances of seeking help or informationfrom oth-
ers outside the team. In interviews, I asked team members
to describe features of their team, such as the goal and the
natureof its task, and to describe how the team organized
its work and what challenges it faced. These general ques-
tions allowed me to listen for examples of learningbehavior.
I taped most interviews, except for some in the factory
where noise levels made it difficultto do so, and reviewed
tapes and notes to identifydata that providedevidence of
team psychologicalsafety and learningbehaviorand to as-
sess whether these constructs variedacross teams. Ex-
amples of learningbehaviorand quotes that suggested the
presence or absence of team psychologicalsafety were tran-
scribed, and these data suggested that both psychological
safety and learningbehaviorvariedacross teams.
359/ASQ, June 1999

Table 1
Construct Development from PreliminaryQualitative Data*
Constructs                                              Positive form                                  Negative form
Beliefs about the team interpersonal context (inferredfrom informant quotes)
Membersof this team respect each           "Itrust the people here that they're         "The[other]team has a lot of trust in the
 other's abilities.                          makingthe rightdecision,for the             expertise of other [memberls,unlike
                                             functionand for ODI.Andthey feel the        this one." (Engineeringmember,
                                             same way about me." [Finance                NPD2)
                                             member, New ProductDevelopment
                                             Team 1 (NPD1)]
                                           "Eachperson is important.Everyoneis
                                             respected." (Marketingmember,
                                             NPD 1)
Membersof this team are interestedin       "There'smuch greateropenness on this         "Whatgets in the way is guys who hold
 each other as people.                       team-it's intangible... . We have a         informationclose to theirchests, so
                                             personalinterestin each other.We're         knowledgedoesn't get filteredout to
                                             comfortableoutside the realmof work,        the team." (Managementeam 2)
                                             we've shared personalinformation...
                                             if you don't know anythingabout
                                             people, you don't know how to react
                                             to them." (Manufacturing  member,
                                             NPD 1)
                                           "Ourefforts to get to know each other
                                             led to our mutual respect....   At the
                                             core, these are outstandinghuman
                                             beings. (Financemember, NPD 1)
Inthis team, you aren'trejectedfor being   "Sallyand Sue both had been getting a        "Peopletry to figureout what [the team
  yourselfor statingwhat you think.          hardtime on the first shift for             leadernwants to hear [beforesaying
                                             outperforming.... That'swhy they like       what they think]."(Management
                                             being on this team." (Chairproduction       team 2)
                                             team 2)
                                           "[Membersof this team are]willingto
                                             state what they believe . . . people, in
                                            other teams, if they don't get their
                                            way, they stay silent."(NPD1)
Membersof this team believe that other     "They'renot out to corruptmy success."       ". . we struggledthroughthe problem
 members have positiveintentions.           (NPD1 team member,referringto the             statement, because it [the project]was
                                            other team members)                           clearlyfor ODI'sinternalneeds, not for
                                                                                          customers. We had a lot of nay sayers
                                                                                          who just wanted to do [the assignment
                                                                                          from management]and not question it.
                                                                                          Theywere worriedabout getting their
                                                                                          hands slapped...." (NPD2)

Team behaviors (observed by researcher or reported by team members or team observers)
Seeking or givingfeedback                  "We talkedto over a hundredcustomers;        "Theywere too methodical,too detailed
                                             this changed the projectgoal slightly,      in theirwandering. . . they did not do
                                             to make it integratemore with the           enough checkingwith customers until
                                             [other]productas a top priority."           too far along."(Seniormanager,R&D,
                                             (Marketingteam member, NPD 1)               describingNPD2)
                                           "We also bringin people fromAdvanced         NPD2 hireda vendorto conduct
                                             Applicationsto bounce ideas off of, to      customer interviews,in contrastto
                                             get a check on what we're doing."           NPDTeam 1 members,who frequently
                                             (Engineeringteam member, NPD 1)             spoke to customers themselves.
                                           "[NPD1 team leader]asks me to come
                                             to certainmeetings; she wants my
                                             view, my industryexperience,and how
                                             [this product]fits with ODI'ssystems
                                             strategy."(Seniormanager,R&D)
                                           "AmI missingthe markwith how to
                                             proceed?Is there anythingyou can
                                             add?"(Teamleader,management
                                             team 1, in a team meeting)
Makingchanges and improvements(vs.         "Everythree months we decide we need         "We did make changes, but too slowly."
 avoidingchange or stickingwith a            to improvehow we get our                    (NPD2)
 course too long)                            information.We look for better ways to     "Theydid learn,but not fast enough."
                                             do somethingand we make changes."           (SeniormanagerdescribingNPD2)
                                             (NPD1)
                                            .". every six months, they take time        ....   [there were a lot of] blind alleys....
                                            out to look at what works . . . and a lot    We had a preconceivednotionof what
                                            happensin those meetings."                   was importanthat preventedus from
                                            (NPD1)                                       seeing it . ." (NPD2)
                                                                                        "We foundourselves going aroundin
                                                                                         circles a lot. Sometimes this took a lot
                                                                                         of time." (NPD2)

                                           360/ASQ, June 1999

                                         Psychological Safety
Table 1 (continued)
Construct Development from PreliminaryQualitative Data*
Constructs                                           Positive form                               Negative form
                                                                                      "Thisteam gets stuck.... It's hardto
                                                                                       get a decision.The dynamicsare that
                                                                                       the conversationgets shut down."
                                                                                       (Managementeam 2)
Obtainingor providinghelp or expertise   "[NPD11used the applicationspecialists
                                           [an ODIinternaldesign group]more
                                           than any other team I know of."
                                           (Seniormanager,R&D)
                                         "I'velearneda lot about marketinga
                                           product-about how and why we make
                                           decisions." (Financeteam member,
                                           NPD 1)
                                         "Arethere any concerns rightnow on
                                           regionalfleets?" (Teamleader,
                                           managementteam 1)
Experimenting                            "There'sa lot of testing of new ways to
                                           do stuff. We're doing design and
                                           engineeringat the same time. It's wild.
                                           It's incrediblycomplex.We need to be
                                           constantlycreativeaboutthe
                                           mechanisms...." (NPD1)
                                         "Therehave been a lot of iterations.It's
                                           like reducinga sauce by half. It's a
                                           more flavorfulsauce, a more complex
                                           groupof ingredients,but the end result
                                           is simpler.We made it easierto use ...
                                           by continuallychallengingourselves to
                                           find what is essential." (NPD1)
                                         One team membercalledthe other eight
                                           together at the beginningof the shift
                                           and asked who was interestedin trying
                                           which new task. She listenedcarefully
                                           to responses and suggested a planthat
                                           she explainedwould allow several
                                           people to learna new role. (Chair
                                           productionteam 1)
                                         Anotherteam memberraisedthe
                                           question of what goal to set for the
                                           shift;after discussion,the team settled
                                           on a new (ambitious)targetof
                                           producing83 chairs.(Chairproduction
                                          team 1)
Engagingin constructiveconflictor        "Theybringconflictup "   directly;they
 confrontation                             don't let it fester . . (Teamleader,
                                           NPD 1)
                                         "Peoplespeak openly in team meetings,
                                           [whereas in otherteams] they wait
                                           untilthe meeting is over and 'speak
                                           privatelyin the hall[abouttheir
                                          frustrations]."'(Financeteam member,
                                           NPD 1)
* NPD= new productdevelopment.Text in italicsbecame the basis of a new survey item.




                                         A set of related beliefs about the interpersonalcontext
                                         emerged as suggestive of the presence (or absence) of
                                         team psychologicalsafety, includinga belief that others
                                         won't reject people for being themselves, that team mem-
                                         bers care about and are interested in each other as people,
                                         that other members have positive intentions,and that team
                                         members respect each other's competence. Table 1 pre-
                                         sents excerpts of these data to illustratethe constructs of
                                         team psychologicalsafety and team learningbehaviorand to
                                         show the elements that made up each construct.
                                         Phase 2: Survey research. All members of the 53 teams in
                                         the sample (496 individuals)were administereda five-section
                                         survey developed-forthis study. Most teams were re-
                                         361/ASQ, June 1999

quested to complete surveys before or after a team meeting
and to enclose them in sealed envelopes collected by ODI
staff and mailed to me. In a few cases, surveys were mailed
to team members with returnenvelopes attached and were
then returnedto me directly.In total, 427 team members
from 51 teams completed the surveys, an 86-percent re-
sponse rate;of these 51 teams, 90 percent of members re-
sponded. Two teams did not returnany surveys; in both
cases, the teams continued to express a desire to participate
but ultimatelyfailed to do so, attributingthis to busy sched-
ules. At the same time, for each team, two or three manag-
ers outside of each team were identifiedas recipientsof the
team's work and were given a short survey I developed to
assess team learningbehaviorand performance;135 of the
150 observers surveyed returnedthe survey, a 91-percent
response rate. Three months after completing the survey,
each team received an individualreport,providingfeedback
about their team and departmentresults compared with the
overallODI results, along with a brief explanationof how to
interpretthese data.
Duringthis time, to obtain independent data that could help
establish the construct validityof survey variablesassessing
team design, another researcher-blind to the survey re-
sults-interviewed 31 managers who were familiarwith the
design of one or more of the 51 teams and who had not
served as team observers. The interview instrumentin-
cluded questions to elicit informants'descriptions of team
design (goal, task, composition, and context support),prob-
ing for factual descriptionsand examples ratherthan evalua-
tions of the team. The interviewerreviewed the tapes, made
notes and-using a five-pointscale from very low to very
high-assessed four variables:(1) presence of a clear goal,
(2) team task interdependence, (3) appropriatenessof team
composition, and (4) context support.
Phase 3: Follow-up qualitative research. Fromthe team
survey data, I identifiedteams with the six lowest and six
highest means for team learningbehavior;seven of these
twelve (fourhigh and three low) were availablefor follow-up
observationand interviews. The set of seven teams con-
sisted of three functionalteams (one high-and two low-
learning),two productdevelopment teams (highand low),
one self-managed team (high),and one projectteam (high);
none of these overlappedwith the eight teams I studied in
the first phase. I observed six of these teams, individually
interviewedone or two members of each, and conducted
interviews with every member of the seventh team. The ob-
jective of this phase was to explore differences between
high-and low-learningteams and to learn more about how
team learningbehaviorworks. I reviewed these field notes
and tapes to construct short cases describingeach team,
which were then used to suggest patterns relatedto team
learning.
Measures
Antecedent factors. l coded the team survey to identifyre-
spondents by team ratherthan by individualand to identify
team type (functional,self-managed, productdevelopment,
or project)and company department(operations,sales, staff
362/ASQ, June 1999

                                                 Psychological   Safety

Table 2
Chronbach's Alpha and Intercorrelations between Group-level Survey Variables*

Variable                      Mean     S.D.        1      2       3        4      5      6       7      8        9     10    11    12

 1. Contextsupport             4.78        .97     .65
 2. Team leadercoaching        3.77        .81     .69    .80
 3. Team psychological
    safety                     5.25    1.03        .70     .63   .82
 4. Team efficacy              5.07    1.07        .70     .50   .50    .63
 5. Team learningbehavior      4.67     .93        .68     .63   .80    .50 .78
 6. Team performance           5.10    1.03        .60     .45   .72    .50 .71   .76
 7. Internalmotivation         6.11     .68       (.03) (-.06)   .15 (-.02) .12   .33           .64
 8. Job involvement            3.30    1.69      -.16    -.22 (-.07) -.26 -.09 (-.01)           .31      t
 9. Team tenure
    (inyears)                  2.40    1.70 (-.06)        .34    -.26     -.15   -.16   -.09   (.05)    (.01)    t
10. Averagecompany
    tenure (inyears)           9.00    6.70        .33   -.31     .26      .15    .17    .14   (.06) (-.01)      .16   t
11. Team learning
    (observerrated)            3.48        .77     .49   -.48     .60      .52    .60    .34   -.16    (-.02) -.21     .30   .84
12. Team performance
    (observerrated)            4.95    1.29        .48   -.50     .47      .43    .52    .36   -.1 1   -.12     -.21   .22   .81   .87
* Chronbach'salpha coefficients are presented on the diagnonal.Correlationsin parentheses not significantat p < .05; all other
  correlationsare significantat p < .05.
t Only 1 survey item.



                                                 services, or cross-functional). I included in the survey scales
                                                 developed by Hackman (1990) to assess team design fea-
                                                 tures, including context support and team leader coaching.

                                                 Team shared beliefs. I developed scales to measure team
                                                 psychological safety and team efficacy, using items designed
                                                 to assess several features of each theoretical construct. In
                                                 doing this, I also drew from qualitative data obtained in
                                                 phase-1 interviews. Sample items for psychological safety
                                                 include "If you make a mistake on this team, it is often held
                                                 against you" (reverse scored), "It is safe to take a risk on
                                                 this team," and "No one on this team would deliberately act
                                                 in a way that would undermine my efforts." Team efficacy
                                                 was measured with items such as "With focus and effort,
                                                 this team can do anything we set out to accomplish." As in
                                                 other sections of the survey, a mix of negatively and posi-
                                                 tively worded items was used to mitigate response set bias.
                                                 (See the Appendix for all items.) The survey also measured
                                                 team tenure (the average number of years each member
                                                 had worked in the team) and company tenure (respondents'
                                                 years of employment at ODI). Between-scale correlations for
                                                 variables in the model are shown in table 2, at the group
                                                 level of analysis (N = 51).

                                                 Team behavior. I developed scales to assess the extent of
                                                 learning behavior for both the team and observer surveys.
                                                 Team learning behavior includes items such as "We regu-
                                                 larly take time to figure out ways to improve our team's
                                                 work process" and "Team members go out and get all the
                                                 information they possibly can from others-such as from
                                                 customers or other parts of the organization."

                                                 Performance. Hackman's team performance scale was used
                                                 to obtain self-report measures of team performance, and I
                                                 developed a similar scale for the observer survey, including
                                                 "This team meets or exceeds its customers' expectations"
                                                 and "Thisteam does superb work."
                                                 363/ASQ, June 1999

 1
                                                Team feedback variables. Additional variables, not included
Discriminant validity was also established
by creating a multitrait multimethod            in the team learning model, such as presence of a clear goal,
(MTMM) matrix (Campbell and Fiske,              adequacy of team composition, team task design, quality of
1959) for each group of variables, from
which I confirmed that, for antecedent
                                                team relationships, job satisfaction, job involvement, and in-
and outcome variables, correlations be-         ternal motivation were included in the team survey for the
tween items designed to measure the             purpose of providing supplementary feedback to the teams.
same construct were larger than correla-
tions between these items and all other
items in the section. For the antecedent
                                                Adequacy of Measures
variables, the average within-trait, be-
tween-method correlation was .35, and
                                                I conducted preparatory analyses to assess psychometric
between-trait, between-method correla-          properties of the two new instruments, including internal
tions (between each item of a given             consistency reliabilityand discriminant validity of the scales.
scale and all items in other scales) aver-
aged .25. For the outcome variables, the        The results supported the adequacy of most of the mea-
average within-trait, between-method cor-       sures for substantive analysis, although Cronbach's alpha
relation was .36 and between-trait, be-         was low for both context support and team efficacy (see
tween-method correlations averaged .25.
                                                table 2). Discriminant validity was established through factor
2
 Factor analyses (principalcomponents,
                                                analysis.1 As the team antecedent and outcome sections
varimax rotation), using a cut-off criterion    yielded, respectively, six and three distinct factors with
of .40 for factor loadings and eigenvalues      eigenvalues greater than one, these results demonstrated
of 1.0 or above, yielded six factors for
the antecedent variables, replicating most      that the team survey was not hampered by excessive com-
 of the planned scales: items for team          mon-method variance, according to Harman's one factor test
 psychological safety, team efficacy, team      for common-method bias.2
task, and clear goal loaded onto four fac-
tors exactly as planned, while context
support items loaded onto two factors,
                                                 I computed two scales from the observer survey (team
 both conceptually related to context sup-       learning behavior and team performance), and both showed
 port, and team composition items loaded         high internal consistency reliability (see table 2). Discriminant
onto the first three factors. All items
were retained in the planned scales be-         validity was lacking; many team learning behavior items
cause they made a positive contribution         were as correlated or more correlated with team perfor-
to Cronbach's alpha. For the team out-
comes section, factor analysis replicated
                                                mance items as with themselves. Some of this between-
the planned scales-team      learning behav-    scale (multitrait)correlation can be attributed to a substantive
ior and team performance. To test               relationship between team learning behavior and team per-
whether team learning behavior and team
psychological safety items were tapping         formance; however, because of the lack of discriminant va-
into the same issues rather than into two       lidity, I avoided analyses that tested relationships between
distinct constructs, I ran a factor analysis    the two variables in the observer survey. Because it is likely
on all items from both scales. Reassur-
ingly, two clean factors resulted, replicat-    that the team observers or customers are in a better posi-
ing the planned scales precisely.               tion to judge performance-defined in part as meeting recipi-
 3                                              ents' needs-than to assess specific behaviors, which they
 Three of the four interview variables were     may not always observe, substantive analyses reported be-
 more correlated with the survey scale mea-     low rely primarilyon observers' ratings of performance and
 suring the same construct than with any
other scale in the survey. The interview        members' ratings of behavior. Observers' ratings of learning
 measure of adequacy of team composition        are used in certain analyses to illustrate consistency in re-
was more highly correlated with the survey      sults across different measures of the same construct. Pear-
 measure of team composition (r = .33, p <
 .01) than with any of the other survey vari-   son correlations between team members' and independent
ables. The degree of task interdependence       observers' responses about team learning (r = .60, p < .001)
and wholeness was most correlated with
the survey variable assessing task design (r
                                                and team performance (r = .36, p < .01) provided one mea-
= .34, p < .01), and context support was        sure of construct validity for the team survey. A substantial
most correlated with context support (r =       degree of correspondence between analogous measures in
.33, p < .01). Although the differences be-
tween correlation values were in some           the team survey and structured interview data also contrib-
cases small, the overall degree of conver-      uted to establishing the construct validity of the survey mea-
gence between the two different instru-         sures of teams' structural features; correlations between
ments is striking.The fourth interview vari-
able, clear team direction, is more             each team-structure scale in the survey and the correspond-
correlated with context support (r = .28, p     ing variable in the structured interviews were positive and
< .05) than with the survey measure of
team direction (r = .17, p = .12); however,
                                                significant.3
this result is, in fact, reassuring for mea-
surement reliability,as the survey and in-      Finally, a group-level variable must satisfy two criteria (Kenny
terview "direction"variables measured           and LaVoie, 1985). First, the construct must be conceptually
two distinct constructs. The survey mea-
sured the extent to which time and effort
                                                meaningful at the group level; for example, team size is a
had been spent on clarifyingteam goals,         meaningful group attribute, internal motivation is not. Sec-
and the interviews asked to what extent         ond, data gathered from individual respondents to assess
the team had a clear shared goal; the low
correlation between the two is thus not         the group attribute must converge, such that the intraclass
surprising.                                     correlation (ICC)is greater than zero. Intraclass correlation
                                                364/ASQ, June 1999

                                               Psychological    Safety

                                               Table 3
                                               Analysis of Variance and Intraclass Correlation Coefficients for
                                               Group-Level Scales
                                               Team survey variables                          F(50,427)               P             ICC

                                               Context support                                 4.80             <.001               .29
                                               Team leader coaching                            4.88             <.001               .30
                                               Team psychological safety                       6.98             <.001               .39
                                               Team efficacy                                   5.70             <.001               .34
                                               Team learning behavior                          5.79             <.001               .27
                                               Team performance                                6.02             <.001               .35
                                               Internal motivation*                            1.13               .07               .03
                                               Job involvement*                                1.25               .06               .04

                                               Observers' survey variables                    F(50,135)               P             ICC

                                               Team learning behaviors                         2.27             <.001               .19
                                               Team performance                                2.90             <.001               .21
                                               * Two variables that are conceptually individual-level variables are included for
                                               purposes of comparison, to demonstrate the contrast between these results
                                               and those for the variables from the same survey that are conceptually group-
                                               level. One-way ANOVA shows these two variables are not significantly differ-
                                               ent across teams, in contrast to the group-level variables, which are significant
                                               to the p < .0001 level.


                                               coefficients, measuring the extent to which team members'
                                               responses agree with each other and differ from other
                                               teams, were calculated for all group-level variables in the
                                               team survey; all were significant at the p < .0001 level.4
                                               Table 3 shows the results. It is particularlynoteworthy that
                                               new measures such as team psychological safety and team
                                               learning behavior have high ICCs (.39 and .33, respectively),
                                               satisfying the methodological prerequisite for group-level
                                               variables. In contrast, ICCs were near zero for constructs
                                               that are conceptually meaningful at the individual rather than
                                               group level of analysis (internal motivation, with ricc = .03
                                               and job involvement with rick = .04); the data thus confirm
                                               that these individual-level constructs are less likely to be
                                               shared within and vary across teams. ICCs were calculated
                                               for observer variables as measures of interrater reliabilityfor
                                               different observers of the same team; these were also posi-
                                               tive and significant. These results allowed the creation of a
                                               group-level data set (N = 51) that merged group means for
                                               group-level variables from both surveys.

                                               RESULTS
                                               Team Psychological                Safety, Efficacy, Learning Behavior,
                                               and Performance
                                               To test hypotheses relating team shared beliefs, learning be-
                                               havior, and performance, I conducted a series of regression
4
                                               analyses, using customers' ratings of team performance as
To generate each intraclass correlation
                                               the dependent variable and measures obtained from team
coefficient, one-way analysis of variance      members as regressors. Because respondents belonging to
(ANOVA)was conducted on the full data          the same team are not independent, I performed regression
set of 427 cases, with team membership
as the independent variable and a team         analyses on the group-level data set (N = 51) to avoid violat-
survey scale as the dependent variable.        ing the regression assumption of independence. The results
Intraclass correlations are significant        are shown in table 4. First, regressing team learning (self-
when the one-way ANOVA from which
the coefficients are derived are significant   reported) on team performance (observer-rated) reveals that
(Kenny and LaVoie, 1985).                      learning   behavior       is   a significant   predictor   of   team       perfor-

                                               365/ASQ, June 1999

mance, supporting HI (model 1). This minimal test of two
key variables in the model was utilized to increase power,
given the small team N, and the same strategy was used to
test other core relationships, such as between team psycho-
logical safety and team learning behavior. To explore alterna-
tive models, I then introduced additional regressors into the
model-specifically, context support and team leader coach-
ing, which in previous studies have been used to explain
team performance-and these provided no additional ex-
planatory value, nor did they, without learning behavior, ac-
count for more variance than learning behavior alone (table
4, models 2 and 3). Similarly, a series of alternative regres-
sors (team psychological safety, team efficacy, context sup-
port, and team leader coaching) individuallyaccounted for
less of the variance in team performance than was ac-
counted for by team learning behavior. Thus, of seven alter-
native models, team learning behavior accounts for the most
variance in observer-rated team performance, providing sup-
port for HI.
 I conducted four regressions to test hypotheses relating
team psychological safety and team efficacy to team learn-
ing behavior. To assess the consistency of these predictions
for differing data sources, I first used self-reported team
learning behavior as the dependent variable and then re-
peated the same analyses using observers' ratings of team
learning behavior. The results reveal a high degree of consis-
tency across the two sets of equations using the two inde-
pendent measures of team learning, as shown in table 5.
First, regressing psychological safety on self-reported team
learning behavior shows a significant positive relationship,
providing initial support for H2 (panel A, model 1). I then re-
gressed team efficacy alone on team learning behavior to
test H4, and although team efficacy accounts for substan-
tially less variance than team psychological safety, the rela-
tionship was positive and significant (panel A, model 2). H5,
that team efficacy is positively associated with team learning
behavior when controlling for team psychological safety, was
not supported for self-reported team learning (panel A,
model 3). With observer-rated team learning as the depen-
dent variable, the results for H2 and H4 were similar to
those obtained using self-reported team learning (panel B).
When team psychological safety and team efficacy were en-
tered into the model together, however, team efficacy re-
mained significant (model 3, panel B), providing some sup-
port for H5. Finally, to explore alternative models, I
regressed other antecedent variables on team learning be-
havior, and, as shown in table 5 (models 4, 5, and 6), team
psychological safety accounts for more variance in both self-
reported and observer-assessed team learning behavior than
context support or team leader coaching. Model 7 then
shows that when all regressors are entered into the model-
for either measure of team learning behavior-only team
psychological safety is significant. Together, these results
provide substantial support for H2, that team psychological
safety is associated with team learning behavior; support for
H4, that team efficacy is associated with team learning be-
havior; and mixed support for H5, that team efficacy predicts
team learning behavior when controlling for team psychologi-
cal safety.
366/ASQ, June 1999

                                          Psychological   Safety

Table 4
Regression Models of Observer-assessed        Team Performance (N= 51)

                                                                      Model

Variable                           (1)           (2)         (3)     (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)

Constant                         1.31            .44         .87    1.41      2.04-     1.48        2.32-
Team learning behavior            .80--          .40
Context support                                  .22         .43                          .75--
Team leader coaching                             .45         .57                                     .93--
Team psychological safety                                            .67--
Team efficacy                                                                  .60--
Adjusted P-squared                 .26           .27         .26     .21       .17        .22        .23

* p < .05;   *-p < .01.



Table 5
Regression Models of Team Learning (N= 51)

                                                                      Model

Variable                          (1)            (2)          (3)     (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)
A. Team learning (self-report)

Constant                         .69           2.45--        .41    1.06      1.4100     1.9400      .42
Team psychological safety        .76--                       .70                                     .51 -
Team efficacy                                   .45--        .11                                   -.05
Context support                                                       .52--     .69--                .28
Team leader coaching                                                  .31                 .75--      .14
Adjusted R-squared               .63            .23          .63      .52      .45        .38        .66

B. Team learning behavior (Observer-assessed)

Constant                         .990          1.5--         .48    1.27-     1.53--    1.7300       .53
Team psychological safety        .46--                       .35                                     .330
Team efficacy                                   .38--        .22-                                    .21
Context support                                                       .27-     .40--               -.07
Team leader coaching                                                  .23                 .46--      .12
Adjusted R-squared               .35            .26          .40      .26      .23        .21        .36

 p < .05; *-p < .01.



                                          To test H3, that team learning behavior mediates the effects
                                          of team psychological safety on team performance, I con-
                                          ducted a three-stage analysis to test whether three condi-
                                          tions for mediation were satisfied: (1) the proposed mediator
                                          significantly predicts the dependent variable, (2) the indepen-
                                          dent variable predicts the mediator, and (3) the contribution
                                          of the independent variables drops substantially for partial
                                          mediation and becomes insignificant for full mediation when
                                          entered into the model together with the mediator (Baron
                                          and Kenny, 1986). In these analyses, I used observers' rat-
                                          ings of performance as the dependent variable and self-re-
                                          ported team learning behavior as the mediating variable, be-
                                          cause this created a higher hurdle for demonstrating a
                                          relationship between team learning and team performance.
                                          As shown above, team learning behavior is significantly posi-
                                          tively associated with team performance, supporting the first
                                          of the three conditions. The second condition, that the inde-
                                          pendent variable (team psychological safety) significantly pre-
                                          dicts the proposed mediator (team learning behavior) also
                                          was established above. Finally, the third condition for media-
                                          tion is also satisfied: the contributionof team psychological
                                          367/ASQ, June 1999

                                             safety becomes insignificant (B = .25, p = .42) when entered
                                             into the regression model together with team learning,
                                             which remains significant (B = .60, p < .05).
                                             Context Support, Leader Behavior, Psychological Safety,
                                             and Learning Behavior
                                             Next, I used regression to test H6, H7, and H8, followed by
                                             GLM analysis to further explore the relationships in H6, that
                                             team leader coaching and context support are positively as-
                                             sociated with team psychological safety. Results are shown
                                             in table 6. As a first test, I regressed these two variables on
                                             team psychological safety. Both were positively related to
                                             the dependent variable; context support was significant and
                                             team leader coaching was close to significant (condition 2).
                                             In testing H7, that team psychological safety mediates be-
                                             tween coaching, context support, and team learning behav-
                                             ior, the first two conditions of the three-step analysis were
                                             already satisfied-team psychological safety predicted team
                                             learning behavior, and context support and coaching pre-
                                             dicted team psychological safety. The third condition was
                                             also satisfied; when all three predictors were entered into
                                             the model simultaneously, the effects of context support
                                             and coaching were insignificant, and team psychological
                                             safety remained significant. This result supports H7, as did
                                             repeating the three-step analysis for self-reported learning
                                             behavior.
                                             In contrast, the results shown in table 7 do not support H8,
                                             that team efficacy functions as a mediator. Team efficacy
                                             predicted observer-rated team learning behavior, but of the
                                             two independent variables, only context support predicted
                                             the proposed mediator, team efficacy. Despite insufficient
                                             support for the second condition, I checked the third condi-
                                             tion by regressing context support and team efficacy on ob-
                                             server-rated team learning and found that the effects of con-
                                             text support were insignificant, while team efficacy remained
                                             barely significant. Finally, using self-reported team learning, I
                                             found no support for mediation.
                                             Next, I examined relationships between context support,
                                             team leader coaching, team psychological safety, and team
                                             learning behavior using GLM analyses on the individual-level
                                             data set (N = 427). This allowed simultaneous testing of ran-
                                             dom effects of team membership and fixed effects of team
                                             type while exploring the relationship between predictor vari-
Table 6
Tests of Team Psychological       Safety as a Mediator between Coaching, Context Support, and Learning

                                                                           Observer-assessed          Self-report learning
                                                                           learning behavior                behavior

Conditions to demonstrate      mediation*       Independent variable      B      t      P      R2    B      t      P      R2

1. Does psychologicalsafety significantly      Team psychologicalsafety   .46   5.26   <.001   .33   .76   9.16   <.001   .63
   predictteam learning?
2. Do coachingand context support              Team leadercoaching        .33   1.89    .06    .52   .33   1.89    .06    .52
   significantlypredictteam psychological      Contextsupport             .56   3.82   <.001         .56   3.82   <.001
   safety?
3. Does the effect of the antecedents drop     Team psychologicalsafety   .29   2.46    .02    .33   .51   4.56   <.001   .66
   substantiallyor become insignificant?       Contextsupport             .09    .66    .51          .24   1.83    .07
   (Teamlearning)                              Team leadercoaching        .12    .78    .21          .14   1.00   .32
* Dependent variables are in italics.


                                             368/ASQ, June 1999

                                             Psychological Safety
Table7
Tests of Team Efficacyas a Mediator between Coaching, Context Support, and Learning

                                                                         Observer-assessed            Self-report learning
                                                                         learning behavior                  behavior
Conditions to demonstrate mediation*            Independent variable    B      t       P      R2     B      t      P       R2

1. Does team efficacysignificantlypredict       Team efficacy           .45   3.97    <.001   .23    .38   4.27   <.001    .26
   team learning?
2. Do coachingand context support               Team leadercoaching     .01    .06     .95           .01    .06    .95
   significantlypredictteam efficacy?           Contextsupport          .77   5.01    <.001   .49    .77   5.01   <.001    .49
3. Does the effect of the antecedents drop      Team efficacy           .26   2.05     .05           .02    .21    .83
   substantiallyor become insignificant?        Contextsupport          .20   1.46     .15    .27    .67   4.44   <.001    .52
   (Teamlearning)
* Dependentvariablesare in italics.



                                             ables and either team psychological safety or team learning
                                             behavior. Despite mean differences across team types in
                                             both team psychological safety and team learning behavior,
                                             GLM analyses revealed that these differences could be ex-
                                             plained by context support and team leader coaching. As
                                             shown in table 8, context support, team leader coaching,
                                             and team membership (random effects of belonging to the
                                             same team) were significant predictors of individuals' ratings
                                             of team psychological safety. In contrast, the effect of team
                                             type was insignificant. Controlling for team tenure revealed
                                             that its effects on team psychological safety were also insig-
                                             nificant. Similarly, team psychological safety, team efficacy,
                                             and team membership were significantly related to team
                                             learning behavior, while team type and team tenure again
                                             were insignificant. Although the GLM analyses allowed a
                                             more detailed apportioning of the variance in individuals' re-
                                             sponses than the group-level data set, which uses team
                                             means as data points, the direction and magnitude of the
                                             results are consistent with those obtained using regression
                                             analysis.
                                             Exploring Differences between High- and Low-
                                             learning Teams
                                             I used the data from the seven teams identified in phase 3
                                             as high- or low-learning to better understand the relationship
                                             between team psychological safety and learning behavior.

Table8
Results of GLMAnalyses (N= 427)
Model                                         Independent variable                         F-ratio                        p
Team psychologicalsafety                     Team type                                 F(3,51)= 2.02                      .12
P2 = .60                                     Team membership*                        F(50,427) = 3.25                  <.001
                                             Contextsupport                           F(1,427) = 26.83                 <.001
                                             Team leadercoaching                      R1,427) = 39.81                  <.001
                                             Team tenure                              R1,427) = 0.10                    .74
Team learningbehavior                        Team type                                 F(3,51)= 2.21                      .10
R2 = .53                                     Team membership*                        F(50,427) = 2.64                  <.001
                                             Team psychologicalsafety                 F(1,427) = 42.21                 <.001
                                             Team efficacy                            F(1,427)= 10.52                  <.001
                                             Team tenure                              F(1,427)= 0.22                    .49
* Team membershipis the categoricalvariableidentifyingeach team. The result that team membershipaccounts for
 significantvariancein team psychologicalsafety or in team learningbehaviorindicatesthat varianceis attributableto
 unexplainedeffects of belongingto the same team.

                                             369/ASQ, June 1999

My goal in studying them was to learn more about how they
functioned as teams rather than to confirm or disconfirm a
model. Table 9 summarizes these qualitative data by com-
paring aspects of context support, leader behavior, team
psychological safety, and team learning behavior. A few ob-
servations stand out. First, team psychological safety is as-
sociated with learning behavior across all seven teams. Sec-
ond, in all cases but two, team leader coaching is associated
with team psychological safety and team learning behavior.
The exceptions, shown in table 9, include the troubled Help
Desk team, for which the leader's reported efforts to help
and coach the team are juxtaposed against persistent con-
flicts and difficulties reported by team members, and a new
product development team (NPD 3), in which the leader
functioned primarilyas a coordinator and offered an easy-
going, passive style that did not match the team's energetic
discussions, active brainstorming, and feedback seeking.
A third observation pertains to team design. The degree of
context support varied across the teams in a way that was
not tightly coupled with the high- or low-learning categoriza-
tion. For example, a self-managed production team (the Stain
Team) confronted persistent depletion of its members, who
were frequently pulled off to work on other jobs in the plant,
leaving two or three others to carry out the six-person
team's work. Despite this obstacle, the team exhibited nu-
merous examples of proactive learning behavior, illustrated
below. The Publications Team had a similar initial design and
degree of context support as two other publications teams
in the larger sample, yet survey data suggested that this
team was both lower in psychological safety (3.9 versus 5.0
and 5.9) and in learning behavior (3.9 versus 4.2 and 5.4)
than the other two similarly appointed teams. Although their
own survey responses show lower means for context sup-
port than the other two teams (3.3 versus 4.5 and 5.4), the
structured interview data (capturing outside managers'
views) place all three at roughly the same level (3 versus 3.5
and 3.5). This comparison shows that learning-oriented
teams might be able to modify their work processes to be
more interdependent, suggesting that team design features
are not always unchangeable constraints. Implications of
these observations are explored in the discussion section.
Examining in more detail the Stain Team, a self-managed
production team (selected as a high-learning team from the
survey data), and the Publications Team, a leader-led func-
tional team (selected as low learning), provides some insight
into how team members' experiences of psychological
safety may enable learning behavior. Evidence of team psy-
chological safety was evident in interviews with each mem-
ber of the Stain Team. For example, Margie, a long-time
team member, offered, "Two years ago in the Stain Team
[under a different structure and leader], people were blaming
each other and trying to make themselves look better, never
taking responsibility . . . but this team is different." Matt, an-
other member, explained, "This team . . . has more coopera-
tion; we take more responsibility for helping each other ....
Right now, I think this is the best team I've been on . . . [in
other teams] it's people not carrying their share, or it's con-
flict.   "
370/ASQ, June 1999

Psychological   Safety

These descriptions allude to a shared belief that one will not
be blamed by other team members, who can be counted on
to help each other and who are not punitive. Interviews with
members also generated numerous examples of learning
behavior. For example, Margie described how the team lis-
tened to and acted on negative feedback from recipients of
the team's work output: "This is going to sound very child-
ish, but let's say I just did a part and I got drips on it. Now, if
they [those next in the production process] told me I got
drips on the edge, I say 'thanks'-and then I'm glad I can
get these drips off. Where it used to be, when that hap-
pened, we'd just try to find something wrong that person
did-we'd keep an eye out for it! It wasn't to be helpful, it
was to bring them down to your level or something like
that.... Now, we don't think anything of it. We just fix it."
In this quote, feedback about the team's work-and about
mistakes, in particular-is seen as helpful. Margie offered a
reason for this change: "I think that the reason we are now
so open to that kind of thing is because we feel that the
people who are telling us are not telling us because they
want to put us down and say we're doing a bad job but be-
cause they want us to do a good job-do the product
good-so they want to work together to make the product
better. "
Her explanation suggests that the team's interpretation of
others' intentions plays an important role in its openness to
feedback; by believing others' intentions to be helpful rather
than critical, the team is more likely to interpret negative
feedback as friendly rather than unfriendly data. Another
member, Joe, described this phenomenon in similar terms,
"Our group is very good; if something comes back to us, I
think all of us will say, 'Yeah, I did that.' I don't think there is
any of us who wouldn't-where before it was, 'I don't re-
member. . . .' Now I think everyone takes responsibility."
Finally, Matt provided an example of learning behavior that
combines the construct of conducting an experiment with
that of seeking feedback: "Sometimes, if we have a quality
issue-we're not sure about something we've just done-
we'll bring others in without telling them what the issue is
to ask them if they see a problem with this part. Second
opinion type stuff. We do a lot of second opinions [from oth-
ers not on the team but in the stain area]." The device of
keeping the others blind to the real concern is used to gen-
erate honest and useful feedback. Knowing they cannot pro-
vide an objective opinion themselves, they seek an objective
eye elsewhere. The Stain Team illustrates how a shared
sense of psychological safety can allow team members to
take interpersonal risks and act in learning-oriented ways.
Margie alluded to understanding others' intentions to be
helpful as making it easy to accept constructive criticism;
Matt described proactive feedback-seeking that is enabled
by the belief that the team takes responsibility for doing
good work and is not focused on placing blame.
In contrast, interviews with the Publications Team, a func-
tional team responsible for preparing brochures and other
publications for a group of ODI dealers, revealed very differ-
ent perceptions of the team's interpersonal context. The
newest member (who joined the team two months earlier)
371/ASQ, June 1999

                                                                                                                                          4-~~~~~~~-U
                                                            Knc           -          >co




                                                                                           U)c                         ()       (                -                                                        E
                                                                              E                                                 EC                                              aUg)         0        -                0
      co           co                   a         f                   E                                                             ,



            U,           CD~~~~~
                           ~~.Cu?~~~~EE-                                                         0    CE                    6~ -5                            E                         co        coC c
           F-            E              ~                   0E                             CU0                                      --               E           a)        CDQ2                                )       E




                               co       _
                                             0,             ~ ~~ ~ ~ aE~ ~~~~-oU)C                         -
                                                                                                                       oc


            4-,
             U)
                                        0,                       -~~~~~0
                                                                    ) 0~~~~~~~~~C
                                                                         CD    >~a)( 0                                          0                *                              a                    0,


                                    <                                                            0
                                                                                           U)>0                                                                           >_)


             -
              O
                E-~~~~~~
                 0 ~~~~~~~~
                        c                                                                                                       co
                                                                                                                                Cu               - U)uco         0-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C E
                                            U),>
                   C                                                                                                        f                                -       )0             Ec               Cu        0
             0                  co _0(                           o-                                                                      CUE


                         (fc                )
                                             co                           ~                ~
                                                                                           co          ~                        ~                    ~                ~                  ~       co
                                                                                                                                                                                                          E

      4Cu                                                                     Q          EC                                          Cu~-                                                                 ~c


                                0,                                            -~~~~~~~~0)>                                                       O                                                        m        U


                                >               ~                ~              E   E~                                               C ~r.E -



                   co
             V
              >u
                               ~        Co             u,
                                                            ~                  )0)
                                                                                     g)0c3
                                                                                  -E2U)?~~~
                                                                                                 O         co)
                                                                                                                   =
                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                           uf)



                   3     0)
                         -C                                                                                                                0     C                                               C


             co     -0
                          0
                          -0
                                  0               x
                                                  a)
                                                                                     E           E0                               E o
                                                                                                           co~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
                                                                                                                                co




                                                                                     0)                                         0)                                                               0)                c




                        U)0C3                                                                    o                              0Co        01) 0)-                                                                 c
             >           Co                                                                    C-                               0Q      )0           O~
                          ~~~0,
                               ~~~~~~-
                          c~~~~Eo
                                                                                           0        2~~~~~~~a
                                                                                                       I0
                                                                                                 oot0)aooui
                                                                                                                                    C E CE                       _

                                                                                                      co                                   0                                                              Co


             U)           00,0,                                                                  0 ~~~~~~0 0                               0 ,0C,0U
Eco                                                                               E- E -0 - c         -(nc                                                                                                o
    ~~~~~~~
G~~~~
   C-) co _0 ~oE                                                              QQ.E
                                                                                    -0 -
                                                                                                                                a0
                                                                                                                                                         O                                       00,Qn
                                                                                                                                                                                                     )U)0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    a) co              E
 o                                                                                   c                                          V          C c                                                   c
           CU            ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~                                                                                        -- 0                                                            ~~~~~Cu

 =           E     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~>                                                                                         ECc
E            Cu~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~o oI                                                                                             E                C




a
                   coc                                                                                         o                coa




                                                                 372/ASQ, June 1999

     Psychological                                        Safety


                               0
                                                                                           ;:    ~~0 ~
     o                                                                                                  Co

                         U)
                      0OcO


                      0             o0                                0T                                     Co
             couCo                                                                                           0

                      a>                                        ~-0                                              -~

                     o
                               OZ-0          )


                               a)                -                            'Z                                  Co
             -                 -          --.                         U)U


         o           ~~~~~~~~                                                 c                  -           !
                               0o                    >-                _--                      )U)oc
                           o             -

                                    E U-o                 co         U)                -

         0       ~~--                ~           -


     ~~~~~~~~~~0-
                                                 E0            0Q

             E                                   U -
                                                               z5
                                                               C')            >5           o
                 H         ~~~~~~~~0c
                               o                                                       c
                                                                                       H                          co


                           a) a           -,z +, c             a)z
         Cu                                   coa)                            C-o                                           c

         a~~ a)~~- - C)cC'

         ~~~~~~~~~

                                                 coc~
                          a)         CU                                                                           a)



                                    Co                               0            ~~0
         o
          a
               a)
                  o
                                                                     .t                          ~                      U
          a ,)                                             ~ c C 00    )

                               DDa
         a,                                                                                      0-ca             co
         o            o = -0 -            +




             E                                   CFn                                                               )
                     C')             o               0                    0                                         0

         H
                               o                                                   0
                                                                 C-)                            -0
                     co                                                                                  c


a)               -J0                                                                                     -

H-               -J~~~~~~~~C                                                                             .-5+




     373/ASQ, June 1999

volunteered, ". . . there are underlying tensions. I'm not sure
where it comes from." A long-time member complained,
"Amanda [the team leader] doesn't want to know if things
aren't going well." Later he added, "I'm not being backed,
not being supported." Another member said, "People are
put down for being different ... [there is a] lack of trust."
These descriptions suggest a tangible lack of team psycho-
logical safety; the notion that someone does not "want to
know if things aren't going well" exemplifies the construct.
There appeared to be little overt learning behavior in this
team. The team's task was flexible enough to permit either
a collaborative approach or division into relatively indepen-
dent tasks, and the degree of interaction varied across the
three publications teams included in the sample of 51
teams. All three teams had the same general task, which
required integrating technical skills with an understanding of
dealers' specific needs to create finished products for a cer-
tain group of dealers, but did not specify how team mem-
bers were to work together. The leader of this team at-
tempted to manage work allocation herself, by assigning
tasks to individuals. As she explained, "Everyone has their
own assignment, but they can help each other.... But are
they pulling together to get it all done? No.... In the past,
some were putting in more hours. I did not like that. It's not
fair.... I try to take care of it by spreading out the volume,
switching the dealers around." Other members explained
that much of the interaction and information transfer is be-
tween team members and dealers rather than among team
members, despite the fact that team members are co-lo-
cated. Within the team, members revealed a lack of learning
behavior such as asking questions. As one member re-
ported, "If I have questions I ask others-but I'm pretty con-
fident in what I do and I do it." Not surprisingly, team mem-
bers also reported not receiving "honest feedback," "not
feeling heard," and having "no opportunity to gain skills, no
opportunity to grow." Another member complained, "People
are leaving, but none of the problems get addressed." Over-
all, the data suggested that the team was stuck in a self-
defeating pattern in which a lack of psychological safety dis-
couraged reaching out to ask for or offer help or to discuss
ways to improve the team's work process. Viewing the envi-
ronment as unsafe, members developed their own coping
strategies, such as planning to leave the team or planning to
stay while remaining as insular as possible.
A similar contrast can be found in data collected in phase 1
of the study, in which the two new product development
teams studied displayed very different experimentation be-
havior. NPD 1 demonstrated an eagerness to experiment, to
try many things quickly and often simultaneously. One mem-
ber, Bob, reported, "There's a lot of testing of new ways to
do stuff. We're doing design and engineering at the same
time. It's wild. It's incredibly complex. We need to be con-
stantly creative about the mechanisms...."     Another mem-
ber, Kim, said, "There have been a lot of iterations. It's like
reducing a sauce by half. It's a more flavorful sauce, a more
complex group of ingredients, but the end result is simpler.
We made it easier to use . . . by continually challenging our-
selves to find what is essential."
374/ASQ, June 1999

Psychological   Safety

In contrast, members of NPD 2 described getting stuck in
"blind alleys" in a process of perfecting one solution at a
time before getting feedback: "We went down a lot of blind
alleys.... We would go down a path for a while, develop
details, then abandon it. Each path represented time
wasted...."    The lack of experimentation behavior in NPD 2
appeared to be related to the team's concern that they had
to produce a certain solution that "management" wanted.
As one member explained, ". . . we had a lot of nay-sayers
who just wanted to do [the project] and not question it. They
were worried about getting their hands slapped by manage-
ment." In contrast, NPD 1 members describe their team as
able to make the right decisions: "I trust the people here
that they're making the right decision for the function and
for ODI. And they feel the same way about me"-a belief
that may facilitate the rapid, low-stakes experimentation be-
havior the team exhibited.

DISCUSSION
Overall, the study shows the usefulness of the construct of
team psychological safety for understanding collective learn-
ing processes. The existence of team psychological safety,
conceptualized as a shared belief about the consequences of
interpersonal risk-taking, at the group level of analysis was
supported by qualitative and quantitative data. A set of sa-
lient beliefs about the interpersonal context that were con-
sistent with this construct emerged from qualitative data col-
lected in phase 1 of the study, and survey items designed to
capture the experience of team psychological safety showed
high internal consistency reliability.The data also suggest
that team psychological safety is something beyond interper-
sonal trust; there was evidence of a coherent interpersonal
climate within each group characterized by the absence or
presence of a blend of trust, respect for each other's com-
petence, and caring about each other as people. But building
trust may be an important ingredient in creating a climate of
psychological safety. Team members interviewed often re-
ferred to others' intentions, such as the Stain Team's belief
that others pointing out their "drips" don't "want to put us
down" but, rather, "want to work together to make the
product better"; such beliefs suggest that a team's proclivity
to trust others' intentions plays a role in psychological safety
and learning behavior. Although building trust may not nec-
essarily create a climate of mutual respect and caring, trust
may provide a foundation for further development of the in-
terpersonal beliefs that constitute team psychological safety.
Support for the Team Learning Model
The relationship between team psychological safety and
learning behavior received substantial empirical support.
Team members' own descriptions, taken from different
types of teams and settings, illustrated how a climate of
safety and supportiveness enabled them to embrace error-
for example, the Stain Team's drips-or to seek feedback
from customers and make changes in a product design, as
did NPD 1. Conversely, a lack of psychological safety contrib-
uted to reluctance to ask for help in preparing publications
for dealers and, in NPD 2, to an unwillingness to question
the team goal for fear of sanction by management. Theirsto-
375/ASQ, June 1999

ries lend weight to the premise that learning behavior in so-
cial settings is risky but can be mitigated by a team's toler-
ance of imperfection and error. This appeared to be a
tolerance (or lack of tolerance) that was understood by all
team members.
The results of the study supported the proposition that team
psychological safety affects learning behavior, which in turn
affects team performance. Quantitative analyses provided
consistent support for six of the eight hypotheses. This in-
cluded support for two mediating relationships: learning be-
havior appears to mediate between team psychological
safety and team performance, and team psychological safety
appears to mediate the effects of context support and team
leader coaching on learning behavior. Data from team ob-
servers on team performance, independent of other data
sources, strengthen these results.
Two hypotheses-that team efficacy would be associated
with learning behavior when controlling for team psychologi-
cal safety and that team efficacy mediates the effect of con-
text support and leader behavior on team learning-were not
supported. This outcome may in fact strengthen the core
argument in this paper-that engaging in learning behavior in
a team is highly dependent on team psychological
safety-by suggesting that team members' confidence that
they will not be punished for a well-intentioned interpersonal
risk enables learning behavior in a way that team efficacy, or
confidence that the team is capable of doing its work, does
not. In contrast to the uneven results for efficacy, one of the
most striking results is the degree to which the proposed
relationship between team psychological safety and team
learning behavior received consistent empirical support
across several analyses and independent measures. The im-
plication of this result is that people's beliefs about how oth-
ers will respond if they engage in behavior for which the out-
come is uncertain affects their willingness to take
interpersonal risks. Because beliefs about team efficacy are
unrelated to this central interpersonal concern, it may be
less important for learning behavior. Thus, the theoretical
premise that lies at the core of the team learning model
does not appear to require the supplementary effects of
team efficacy. Moreover, the conclusion that team psycho-
logical safety fosters team learning behavior is both consis-
tent with existing organizational learning theory and has a
certain degree of face validity; that is, the juxtaposition of
team members' descriptions of the interpersonal context in
their team with their stories of learning behavior is not a sur-
prising one.
Quantitative and qualitative results both suggested that con-
text support accounts for variance in learning behavior but,
also, that it provides an incomplete explanation. The quanti-
tative data demonstrated a positive association between
context support and psychological safety, and the qualitative
data allowed isolation of specific cases from within this gen-
eral trend that suggested different ways real teams handle
the absence or presence of enabling design conditions. For
example, the Stain Team lacked context support and yet
was learning-oriented. The Publications Team, despite having
a similar set-up and level of context support as two other
376/ASQ, June 1999

Psychological   Safety

publications teams, showed substantially less learning be-
havior than they did. Thus, a focus on just these two teams
might suggest that context support and other features of
team design account for little variance in learning behavior.
In contrast, the seven high- and low-learning teams studied
provided more data and do suggest an important role for
team design in team learning.
First, the four high- and three low-learning teams differed
markedly by team type. Functional teams were overrepre-
sented in the low-learning teams (two of three), and product
development, project, and self-managed teams made up
three of the four high-learning teams. The two groups also
differed somewhat on whether they exhibited key elements
of a well-designed team (cf. Hackman, 1987). The low-learn-
ing teams' tasks at the time of the study tended to lack in-
terdependence; for example, in the Publications Team, each
member had his or her "own assignment"; other team
members could be used as resources, but as a design for
teamwork, the arrangement was suboptimal. But the fact
that the two other publications teams in the survey sample
had higher levels of learning demonstrates that the degree
of task interdependence can be modified through learning
behavior. Similarly, context support was adequate for the
three low-learning teams and inadequate for two of the four
high-learning teams, also illustrating that it is possible for
teams to overcome limitations in their context through learn-
ing behavior. These few cases thus provided evidence that
high-learning teams could overcome obstacles they faced in
their initial set-up; a lack of structural support did not seal
their fate. The Stain Team overcame personnel limits that
repeatedly depleted their ranks, and the Fusion Team (de-
scribed in table 9) overcame time and staffing constraints to
push energetically forward on its shared project. In contrast,
low-learning teams, such as the Publications and Help Desk
teams, appeared vulnerable to a self-sealing pattern of mem-
bers having private concerns about the team environment,
which led to withholding relevant thoughts and actions and
made it difficult to escape the low-learning condition. These
cases suggest an asymmetry, in which high-learning teams
can confront and work with design and other constraints to
improve their situation, while low-learning teams are far
more likely to get stuck and be unable to alter their situation
without intervention.
An integrative perspective that mirrors and reinforces the
results of the quantitative data can be articulated from the
seven cases; in this, team psychological safety is a mecha-
nism that mediates between effective team design and
learning behavior. Effective team leader coaching and con-
text support, such as access to information and resources,
appear to contribute to, but not to fully shape, an environ-
ment in which team members can develop shared beliefs
that well-intentioned interpersonal risks will not be punished,
and these beliefs enable team members to take proactive
learning-oriented action, which in turn fosters effective per-
formance. Quantitative results also suggest that team psy-
chological safety mediates between team structures (context
support and coaching) and the behavioral outcome of team
learning.These findings have importantimplicationsfor theo-
377/ASQ, June 1999

ries of team effectiveness. They suggest an explanation for
how effective team design and leadership enables effective
team performance.
Study Limitations and Model Applicability
The results of this study represent a first step in establishing
team psychological safety as a construct, but additional con-
ceptual and empirical work is needed to refine and extend
the implications of the construct before firm conclusions can
be drawn. The qualitative data, although consistent with the
proposed construct, did not map onto it precisely. Similarly,
survey items used to capture the experience of team psy-
chological safety also have conceptual relationships with
other interpersonal constructs, especially trust. Thus, the
empirical data were supportive of the existence of team psy-
chological safety as a construct but could not conclusively
differentiate it from related constructs. Further research is
needed to establish construct validity.
The relationship between psychological safety and learning
could be detected across the four types of teams in the
study; for example, whether a team was a self-managed
team producing chairs or a management team designing
transportation strategy, team psychological safety generally
was associated with team learning behavior. Although I can-
not generalize from this study about the relationship be-
tween team learning and team performance for all types of
teams, it is likely that under certain conditions, team learning
behavior will not control much variance in team perfor-
mance, such as for team tasks that are highly constrained
with tightly specified criteria for success. For example, a
team working to assemble a product on a machine-paced
assembly line is less likely to benefit from learning behavior
than a team with few inherent task constraints and uncertain
criteria for success, such as a cross-functional product devel-
opment team designing a new product. Highly constrained
tasks leave little opportunity for information seeking to be
helpful in improving team performance, and feedback tends
to be built into the task, such that asking others for feedback
becomes redundant. Unconstrained tasks such as designing
a new product, in contrast, create ample opportunity for the
team's output to benefit from new information and feed-
back. The utility of learning behavior across team types thus
deserves further research.
This study provides a limited exploration of factors that man-
agers can influence in their efforts to promote team learning.
It focused on two antecedent conditions with clear concep-
tual relationships to team psychological safety but did not
examine a wide range of managerial factors that might also
affect team learning. For example, team leader coaching was
included in the study, but the data do not specify leader be-
haviors precisely. Furthermore, analyses testing predictors of
team psychological safety had to rely on variables from
within the same survey. Although the team survey was not
subject to excessive common-method variance, this is still a
concern and suggests that findings on the antecedents of
team psychological safety should be considered tentative.
Thus, further research is needed to explore factors that pro-
mote team psychologicalsafety.
378/ASQ, June 1999

Psychological   Safety

The cross-sectional survey design prevented a demonstra-
tion of causality and also limited my ability to explore dy-
namic issues. The theoretical model also leaves out the dy-
namic interaction that is likely to take place in which team
psychological safety facilitates taking the risks of learning
behavior, which, when unpunished by the team, further rein-
forces team psychological safety. A team's history includes
events that demonstrate to members that interpersonal risk
is or is not worthwhile, and thus both psychological safety
and learning may be influenced as much or more by the cu-
mulative effects of interpreting these events as by initial de-
sign features. Some evidence of the effects of history could
be seen in the Stain Team, where informants contrasted
present conditions with those under an earlier leader. None-
theless, how shared beliefs are created gradually in teams
over time as a consequence of minor events and subtle in-
teractions cannot be assessed in this study, nor can whether
self-reinforcing cycles or spirals exist. Given the inherently
dynamic nature of learning, this snapshot approach provides
an incomplete picture. Issues of how team psychological
safety develops over time and how team learning behavior
might alter undesirable structural factors warrant careful con-
sideration and future research.
Finally, conducting the study in a single company imposed
limitations, suggesting caution in drawing conclusions for
teams in other organizations. Although there was consider-
able diversity across teams in work context, organization
level, education, and tenure, the sample may not be repre-
sentative of the full spectrum of possible teams in work or-
ganizations. Moreover, with 51 teams, the sample size is
small for multivariate analyses. The inclusion of four team
types is both a strength and a weakness of the study. On
one hand, unlike studies that include only one type of team,
such as sales teams or production teams, the findings can-
not be said to be merely a function of the nature of the
team task. On the other hand, this inclusion also brought in
more variables than could be thoroughly tested with only 51
teams. Larger studies could strengthen the validity of the
findings.

CONCLUSION
Structural and interpersonal factors have been viewed in the
literature as alternative explanations for team effectiveness.
This study supported, instead, an integrative perspective, in
which structural and interpersonal characteristics both influ-
ence learning and performance in teams. In particular,the
results showed that psychological safety is a mechanism
that helps explain how previously studied structural factors,
such as context support and team leader coaching, influence
behavioral and performance outcomes. Future team research
has much to gain by investigating how structural and inter-
personal factors are interrelated rather than which is more
important. To do this, it is essential to study real work
teams. There was some evidence in this study that a team's
history matters in shaping psychological safety. Shared be-
liefs about how others will react are established over time;
these cannot take shape in the laboratory in a meaningful
way. Moreover,for the risks of learningto be salient, the
379/ASQ, June 1999

                                         interpersonalconsequences must matter-as they do in on-
                                         going work relationships.Studyinglearningin laboratory
                                         groups is therefore likelyto miss an essential source of vari-
                                         ance. Beyond the need to study real groups, longitudinalre-
                                         search could help to develop an understandingof how psy-
                                         chologicalsafety develops or erodes with changes in
                                         membership, leadership,or context.
                                         In this study, my focus on learningbehaviorand its accom-
                                         panyingrisk made the interpersonalcontext especially sa-
                                         lient; however, the need for learningin work teams is likely
                                         to become increasinglycriticalas organizationalchange and
                                         complexity intensify. Fast-pacedwork environmentsrequire
                                         learningbehaviorto make sense of what is happeningas
                                         well as to take action. With the promise of more uncertainty,
                                         more change, and less job security in future organizations,
                                         teams are in a position to providean importantsource of
                                         psychologicalsafety for individualsat work. The need to ask
                                         questions, seek help, and tolerate mistakes in the face of
                                         uncertainty-while team members and other colleagues
                                         watch-is probablymore prevalentin companies today than
                                         in those in which earlierteam studies were conducted. This
                                         may partiallyaccount for the empiricalsupport I found for
                                         the role of psychologicalsafety in promotingperformancein
                                         these work teams; however, it also suggests that psycho-
                                         logicalsafety and ways to promote it will be increasinglyrel-
                                         evant for future research on work teams.

REFERENCES
Alderfer, Clayton P.                     1993 Knowledge for Action: A           Brown, Roger
1987 "An intergroup perspective on            Guide to Overcoming Barriers      1990 "Politeness theory: Exemplar
      organizational behavior." In            to Organizational Change. San          and exemplary." In I. Rock
      J. W. Lorsch (ed.), Handbook            Francisco: Jossey-Bass.                (ed.), The Legacy of Solomon
      of Organizational Behavior:                                                    Asch: Essays in Cognition and
                                         Argyris, Chris, and Donald Sch6n
      190-222. Englewood Cliffs,         1978 Organizational Learning: A             Social Psychology: 23-37.
      NJ: Prentice-Hall.                                                             Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
                                              Theory of Action Perspective.
Alderfer, Clayton P., and D. L.                Reading, MA: Addison-Wes-        Campbell, D. T., and D. W. Fiske
Brown                                          ley.                             1959 "Convergent and discriminant
1972 "Designing an empathic ques-                                                    validation by the multitrait-
                                         Ashford, Susan J., and Anne S.
      tionnaire for organizational re-   Tsui                                        multimethod matrix." In D. N.
      search." Journal of Applied                                                    Jackson and S. Messick
                                         1991 "Self regulation for managerial
      Psychology, 56: 456-468.                                                       (eds.), Problems in Human
                                               effectiveness: The role of ac-
Ancona, Deborah G., and David F.                                                     Assessment. New York:
                                              tive feedback seeking." Acad-
                                                                                     McGraw-Hill.
Caldwell                                       emy of Management Journal,
1992 "Bridging the boundary: Exter-            34: 251-280.                     Campion, Michael A., Gina J.
     nal activity and performance in                                            Medsker, and A. Catherine Higgs
                                         Bandura, Albert
     organizational teams." Admin-                                              1993 "Relations between work
                                         1982 "Self-efficacy mechanism in
     istrative Science Quarterly, 37:                                                group characteristics and ef-
                                              human agency." American
     634-655.                                                                        fectiveness: Implications for
                                              Psychologist, 37: 22-147.
Argote, Linda, Deborah Gruenfeld,                                                    designing effective work
                                         Baron, Reuben M., and David A.              groups." Personnel Psychol-
and Charles Naquin
                                         Kenny                                       ogy, 46: 823-850.
1999 "Group learning in organiza-
                                         1986 "The moderator-mediator vari-
     tions." In M. E. Turner (ed.),                                             Cohen, Susan G., and Gerald E.
                                              able distinction in social psy-
      Groups at Work: Advances in                                               Ledford
                                              chological research: Concep-
     Theory and Research. New                                                   1994 "The effectiveness of self-
                                              tual, strategic and statistical
     York: Erlbaum (forthcoming).                                                    managing teams: A quasi-ex-
                                              considerations." Journal of
Argyris, Chris                                Personality and Social Psy-            periment." Human Relations,
1982 Reasoning, Learning and Ac-                                                     47: 13-43.
                                              chology, 51: 1173-1183.
     tion: Individualand Organiza-                                              Dewey, John
     tional. San Francisco: Jossey-                                             1922 Human Nature and Conduct.
      Bass.                                                                          New York: Holt.
                                                                                1938 Logic: The Theory of Inquiry.
                                                                                     New York: Holt.

                                         380/ASQ, June 1999

                                        Psychological   Safety

Dutton, Jane                            Hackman, J. Richard                     Levitt, Barbara, and James G.
1993 "The making of organizational      1987 "The design of work teams."        March
     opportunities: An interpretive          In J. Lorsch (ed.), Handbook       1988 "Organizational learning." An-
     pathway to organizational               of Organizational Behavior:               nual Review of Sociology, 14:
     change." In L. L. Cummings              315-342. Englewood Cliffs,               319-340. Palo Alto, CA: An-
     and B. M. Staw (eds.), Re-              NJ: Prentice-Hall.                       nual Reviews.
     search in Organizational Be-
                                        Hackman, J. Richard (ed.)               Lindsley, Dana H., Daniel J. Brass,
     havior, 15: 195-226. Green-
                                        1990 Groups that Work (and Those        and James B. Thomas
     wich, CT: JAI Press.
                                             That Don't). San Francisco:        1995 "Efficacy-performance spirals:
Edmondson, Amy C.                            Jossey-Bass.                             A multi-level perspective."
1996 "Learning from mistakes is                                                       Academy of Management Re-
                                        Henderson, Rebecca H., and Kim
     easier said than done: Group       B. Clark                                      view, 20: 645-678.
     and organizational influences
                                        1990 "Architectural innovation: The     MacDuffie, John Paul
     on the detection and correc-
                                              reconfiguration of existing       1997 "The road to 'root cause':
     tion of human error." Journal
                                              product technology and the             Shop-floor problem-solving at
     of Applied Behavioral Science,
                                              failure of existing firms." Ad-        three auto assembly plants."
     32: 5-32.
                                              ministrative Science Quarterly,
                                                                                     Management Science, 43:
Edmondson, Amy C., and                        35: 9-30.
                                                                                     479-502.
Bertrand Moingeon
                                        Janis, Irving L.
1998 "From organizational learning                                              Mayer, Roger C., James H. Davis,
                                        1982 Groupthink, 2d ed. Boston:
      to the learning organization."                                            and F. David Schoorman
                                              Houghton-Mifflin.
      Management Learning, 29:                                                  1995 "An integrative model of orga-
      499-517.                          Kenny, David A., and Lawrence La             nizational trust." Academy of
                                        Voie                                         Management Review, 20:
Gibson, Christina B.
                                        1985 "Separating individual and              709-734.
1996 "They do what they believe
                                             group effects." Journal of Per-
     they can: Group-efficacy be-                                               Michael, Donald N.
                                             sonality and Social Psychol-
     liefs and group performance                                                1976 On Learning to Plan and Plan-
                                             ogy, 48: 339-348.
     across tasks and cultures."                                                     ning to Learn. San Francisco:
     Academy of Management              Klimoski, Richard, and                       Jossey-Bass.
     Journal, 42: 138-1 52.             S. Mohammed
                                        1994 "Team mental model: Con-           Robinson, Sandra L.
Goffman, Erving                                                                 1996 "Trust and breach of the psy-
                                             struct or metaphor?" Journal
1955 "On face-work: An analysis of                                                   chological contract." Adminis-
                                             of Management, 20: 403-437.
     ritual elements in social inter-                                                trative Science Quarterly, 41:
     action." Psychiatry, 18: 213-      Kolb, David A.
                                                                                     574-599.
     231.                               1984 Experiential Learning. Engle-
                                              wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.   Sanna, Lawrence J., and R. Lance
Golembiewski, Robert T., and                                                    Shotland
Mark McConkie                           Kramer, Roderick M.
                                                                                1990 "Valence of anticipated evalu-
1975 "The centrality of interper-       1999 "Trust and distrust in organi-
                                             zations: Emerging perspec-               ation and social facilitation."
     sonal trust in group process."
                                             tives, enduring questions."              Journal of Experimental Social
     In Cary L. Cooper (ed.), Theo-
                                             Annual Review of Psychology,             Psychology, 26: 82-92.
     ries of Group Process: 131-
     181. London: Wiley.                     50: 569-598. Palo Alto, CA:        Schein, Edgar H.
                                             Annual Reviews.                    1993 "How can organizations learn
Goodman, Paul, S. Devadas, and
T. L. Hughson                           Lee, Fiona                                    faster? The challenge of enter-
1988 "Groups and productivity:          1997 "When the going gets tough,              ing the green room." Sloan
      Analyzing the effectiveness of          do the tough ask for help?              Management Review, 34: 85-
      self-managing teams." In J. P.          Help seeking and power moti-            92.
      Campbell, R. J. Campbell, and           vation in organizations." Orga-   Schein, Edgar H., and Warren
      Associates (eds.), Designing            nizational Behavior and Hu-       Bennis
      Effective Work Groups: 295-             man Decision Processes, 72:       1965 Personal and Organizational
      327. San Francisco: Jossey-             336-363.                                Change via Group Methods.
      Bass.                             Leonard-Barton, Dorothy                       New York: Wiley.
Goodman, Paul, E. RavIin, and M.        1995 Wellsprings of Knowledge:          Schbn, Donald
Schminke                                     Building and Sustaining the        1983 The Reflective Practitioner.
1987 "Understanding groups in or-            Sources of Innovation. Bos-             New York: Basic Books.
     ganizations." In L. L. Cum-             ton: Harvard Business School
     mings and B. M. Staw (eds.),            Press.                             Senge, Peter M.
     Research in Organizational                                                 1990 The Fifth Discipline: The Art
                                        Levine, John M., and Richard L.
     Behavior, 9: 121-173. Green-                                                     and Practice of the Learning
                                        Moreland
     wich, CT: JAI Press.               1991 "Culture and socialization in            Organization. New York:
                                             work groups." In L. B.                   Doubleday.
Guzzo, R. A., P. R. Yost, R. J.
Campbell, and G. P. Shea                      Resnick, J. M. Levine, and        Sitkin, Sim B.
1993 "Potency in groups: Articulat-           S. D. Teasley (eds.), Perspec-    1992 "Learning through failure: The
     ing a construct." British Jour-         tives on Socially Shared Cog-             strategy of small losses." In
     nal of Social Psychology, 32:            nition: 257-279- Washington,             L. L. Cummings and B. M.
     87-106.                                  DC: American Psychological               Staw (eds.), Research in Orga-
                                             Association.                              nizational Behavior, 14: 231-
                                                                                       266. Greenwich, CT: JAI
                                                                                       Press.

                                        381/ASQ, June 1999

Stasser, Garold, and William Titus          Tyler, Tom R., and E. Allan Lind            Walsh, James
1987 "Effects of information load           1992 "A relational model of author-         1995 "Managerial and organizational
      and percentage of shared in-                ity in groups." In Advances in             cognition: Notes from a trip
      formation on the dissemina-                 Experimental Psychology, 25:               down memory lane." Organi-
      tion of unshared information                115-191. New York: Aca-                    zation Science, 6: 280-321.
      during group discussion."                   demic Press.                          Watkins, Victoria J., and Karen E.
      Journal of Personality and So-        Wageman, Ruth                               Marsick
      cial Psychology, 53: 81-93.           1998 "The effects of team design            1993 Sculpting the Learning Organi-
Staw, Barry M., Lance E.                         and leader behavior on self-                zation: Lessons in the Art of
Sandelands, and Jane E.                          managing teams: A field                     Systemic Change. San Fran-
Dutton                                           study." Working paper, School               cisco: Jossey-Bass.
1981 "Threat-rigidityeffects in orga-            of Business, Columbia Univer-
      nizational behavior: A multi-              sity.
      level analysis." Administrative
      Science Quarterly, 26: 501-
      524.


APPENDIX: Survey Scales and Item Correlations

Team survey item*                                                                                  Pearson R correlations

Supportiveness     of organization context                                                                 2     3     4     5

1. Thisteam gets all the informationit needs to do ourworkand planour schedule.                            .43   .29   .26   .22
2. It is easy for this team to obtainexpertassistance when somethingcomes up that we don't
   know how to handle.                                                                                           .26   .30   .24
3. Thisteam is kept in the darkaboutcurrentdevelopmentsand futureplansthat may affect
   its work.                                                                                                           .26   .29
4. Thisteam lacks access to useful trainingon the job.                                                                       .15
5. Excellentwork pays off in this company.

Task design                                                                                                            2     3

1. The workthat this team does makes a differencefor the people who receive or use it.                                 .23   .27
2. The workwe do on this team itself providesus with plentyof feedbackabout how well the
   team is performing.                                                                                                       .25
3. Those who receive or use this team's outputrarelygive us feedbackabout how well our
   workmeets theirneeds.

Clear direction                                                                                                        2     3

1. It is clearwhat this team is supposed to accomplish.                                                                .41   .38
2. Thisteam spent time makingsure every team member understandsthe team objectives.                                          .65
3. The team has invested plentyof time to clarifyour goals.

Team composition                                                                                                       2     3

1. Most people in this team have the abilityto solve the problemsthat come up in our work.                             .26   .34
2. Allmembers of this team have more than enough trainingand experiencefor the kindof
   workthey have to do.                                                                                                      .27
3. Certainindividualsin this team lackthe special skills needed for good team work.

Team efficacy                                                                                                          2     3

1. Achievingthis team's goals is well withinour reach.                                                                 .37   .43
2. Thisteam can achieve its task withoutrequiringus to put in unreasonabletime or effort.                                    .28
3. Withfocus and effort,this team can do anythingwe set out to accomplish.

Team psychological      safety*                                                               2      3     4     5     6     7

1. Ifyou make a mistakeon this team, it is often held againstyou.                            .36     .38   .49   .41   .34   .43
2. Membersof this team are able to bringup problemsand tough issues.                                 .28   .56   .35   .34   .37
3. People on this team sometimes rejectothers for being different.                                         .32   .45   .45   .33
4. It is safe to take a riskon this team.                                                                        .37   .37   .48
5. It is difficulto ask other members of this team for help.                                                           .42   .41
6. No one on this team would deliberatelyact in a way that underminesmy efforts.                                             .39
7. Workingwith members of this team, my uniqueskillsand talents are valuedand utilized.

Team leader coachingt                                                                                                  2     3

Theteam leader ...
1.   initiatesmeetings to discuss the team's progress.                                                                 .38   .47
2.   is availablefor consultationon problems.                                                                                .70
3.   is an ongoing "presence"in this team-someone who is readilyavailable.


                                           382/ASQ, June 1999

                                           Psychological    Safety

APPENDIX (continued)

Team learning behavior*                                                                        2     3     4      5    6     7

1. We regularlytake time to figureout ways to improveourteam's work processes.                 .23   .28   .35   .41   .30   .23
2. Thisteam tends to handledifferencesof opinionprivatelyor off-line,ratherthan
   addressingthem directlyas a group.                                                                .26   .31   .27   .29   .22
3. Team members go out and get all the informationthey possiblycan from others-such
   as customers, or other partsof the organization.                                                        .38   .35   .37   .37
4. Thisteam frequentlyseeks new informationthat leads us to make importantchanges....                            .41   .47   .37
5. Inthis team, someone always makes sure that we stop to reflect on the team's workprocess.                           .47   .25
6. People in this team often speak up to test assumptionsabout issues underdiscussion.                                       .43
7. We invitepeople from outside the team to present informationor have discussions with us.

Team performance*                                                                                          2     3     4     5

1. Recently,this team seems to be "slipping"a bit in its level of performanceand
   accomplishments.                                                                                        .38   .41   .44   .40
2. Those who receive or use the workthis team does often have complaintsabout
   our work.                                                                                                     .26   .42   .47
3. The qualityof work providedby this team is improvingover time.                                                      .36   .26
4. Criticalqualityerrorsoccurfrequentlyin this team.                                                                         .51
5. Othersin the companywho interactwith this team often complainabout how it functions.

Internal motivation*                                                                                                   2     3

1. My opinionof myself goes up when I do my job well.                                                                  .33   .48
2. I feel bad and unhappywhen I discoverthat I have performedless well than I should have
   in my job.                                                                                                                .30
3. I feel a great sense of personalsatisfactionwhen I do my job well.
Job Involvement*
1. I live, eat, and breathemy job.

Observer Survey Items

Team learning behaviorst                                                                       2     3     4     5     6     7

Thisteam ...
1. ... asks its internalcustomers (those who receive or use its work)for feedbackon its
   performance.                                                                                .24   .55   .39   .52   .37   .30
2.     relies on outdatedinformationor ideas. (Reversescored)                                        .46   .37   .36   .47   .36
3.     activelyreviews its own progressand performance.                                                    .47   .61   .38   .51
4.     does its workwithoutstoppingto considerall the informationteam members have.
   (Reversescored)                                                                                               .36   .44   .22
5.     regularlytakes time to figureout ways to improveits work performance.                                           .49   .44
6.     ignoresfeedbackfrom others in the company.(Reversescored)                                                             .30
7.     asks for help from others in the companywhen somethingcomes up that team
   members don't know how to handle.

Team performance*                                                                                                2     3     4

1. Thisteam meets or exceeds its customers' expectations.                                                        .77   .62   .64
2. Thisteam does superbwork.                                                                                           .57   .71
3. Criticalqualityerrorsoccurfrequentlyin this team's work. (Reversescored)                                                  .53
4. Thisteam keeps getting better and better.
* 7-pointscale from "veryinaccurate"to "veryaccurate."
t 5-pointscale from "never"to "always."




                                           383/ASQ, June 1999

