Old Dominion University
ODU Digital Commons
Management Faculty Publications                                                                               Department of Management



2017

Psychological Safety: A Meta‐Analytic Review and
Extension
M. Lance Frazier

Stav Fainshmidt

Ryan L. Klinger
Old Dominion University, rklinger@odu.edu

Amir Pezeshkan

Veselina Vracheva




Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.odu.edu/management_fac_pubs
   Part of the Business Administration, Management, and Operations Commons, and the
Psychology Commons

Repository Citation
Frazier, M. Lance; Fainshmidt, Stav; Klinger, Ryan L.; Pezeshkan, Amir; and Vracheva, Veselina, "Psychological Safety: A
Meta‐Analytic Review and Extension" (2017). Management Faculty Publications. 13.
https://digitalcommons.odu.edu/management_fac_pubs/13

Original Publication Citation
Frazier, M. L., Fainshmidt, S., Klinger, R. L., Pezeshkan, A., & Vracheva, V. (2017). Psychological safety: A meta‐analytic review and
extension. Personnel Psychology, 70(1), 113-165. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/peps.12183


This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Department of Management at ODU Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion
in Management Faculty Publications by an authorized administrator of ODU Digital Commons. For more information, please contact
digitalcommons@odu.edu.

PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY
2017, 70, 113–165




PSYCHOLOGICAL SAFETY: A META-ANALYTIC
REVIEW AND EXTENSION
                                     M. LANCE FRAZIER
                                     Creighton University

                                      STAV FAINSHMIDT
                                 Florida International University

                                      RYAN L. KLINGER
                                    Old Dominion University

                                     AMIR PEZESHKAN
                                    University of Baltimore

                                   VESELINA VRACHEVA
                                    North Central College


      Although psychological safety research has flourished in recent years,
      and despite the empirical support for the important role of psychologi-
      cal safety in the workplace, several critical questions remain. In order to
      address these questions, we aggregate theoretical and empirical works,
      and draw on 136 independent samples representing over 22,000 individ-
      uals and nearly 5,000 groups, to conduct a comprehensive meta-analysis
      on the antecedents and outcomes of psychological safety. We not only
      present the nomological network of psychological safety but also extend
      this research in 4 important ways. First, we compare effect sizes to de-
      termine the relative effectiveness of antecedents to psychological safety.
      Second, we examine the extent to which psychological safety influences
      both task performance and organizational citizenship behaviors over
      and beyond related concepts such as positive leader relations and work
      engagement. Third, we examine whether research design characteris-
      tics and national culture alter validities within the nomological network,
      thus promoting a more accurate and contextualized understanding of
      psychological safety. Finally, we test the homology assumption by com-
      paring the effect sizes of the antecedents and outcomes of psychological
      safety across individual and group levels of analysis. We conclude with
      a discussion of the areas in need of future examination.




   We thank Dr. Bradford Bell and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful and
constructive feedback that enabled us to substantially improve our manuscript. We also
thank Ethan Burris for his helpful comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript.
   Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to M. Lance Frazier,
Marketing and Management Department, Creighton University, Omaha, NE 68178;
lancefrazier@creighton.edu.

C 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.                                      doi: 10.1111/peps.12183

                                              113

114                   PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


                               Introduction

    Today’s dynamic and hypercompetitive environments have rendered
continuous improvements through learning, change, and innovation im-
perative to organizational success. These processes develop across multi-
ple levels of the organization as individuals and groups engage in behaviors
such as speaking up, collaborating, and experimenting (Grant & Ashford,
2008; Nembhard & Edmondson, 2011). In turn, employees are expected
to take a more active role at work, which has resulted in organizational
scholars attempting to identify the factors that foster the willingness by
employees to take interpersonal risks and invest their energies into work
(Kahn, 1990). One cognitive state that has emerged as a key factor in
facilitating the process of learning, organizational change, and employee
engagement is psychological safety—the belief that the workplace is safe
for interpersonal risk taking (Edmondson, 1999; Kahn, 1990).
    Psychological safety was introduced to the organizational sciences a
half century ago by Schein and Bennis (1965), but it is only in recent years
that empirical work has flourished. This research has generally demon-
strated that psychological safety allows employees “to feel safe at work
in order to grow, learn, contribute, and perform effectively in a rapidly
changing world” (Edmondson & Lei, 2014, p. 23). However, despite the
growing body of empirical support for the important role of psychological
safety in today’s workplace, several important questions remain. In order
to address these questions and move research on psychological safety for-
ward, we conducted a comprehensive meta-analysis on the antecedents
and outcomes of psychological safety. In doing so, we hope to contribute
to the literature in four important ways.
    First, although many antecedents of psychological safety have been
proposed in the extant literature, their relative importance remains un-
clear. Here, we not only compare antecedents across categories within the
nomological network of psychological safety but also employ a nuanced
approach, allowing us to examine the effect sizes of similar, yet unique,
antecedent constructs within broad categories. By being detailed in our
development, we are able to determine the relative effectiveness of an-
tecedents to psychological safety. Given the importance of psychological
safety to workplace outcomes, our study advances a better understanding
of the drivers of psychological safety perceptions.
    Second, in order to fully understand psychological safety’s role in the
workplace, we not only present the nomological network of psychological
safety but also explore the incremental validity of psychological safety
over and above related constructs. Specifically, we examine the extent
to which psychological safety accounts for unique variance in both task
performance and organizational citizenship behaviors over and beyond

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                          115


constructs capturing positive leader relations, work design characteristics,
and work engagement. Hence, our meta-analysis highlights psychological
safety’s validity in relation to important work outcomes, above and beyond
the effects of antecedents that may lead to the emergence of psychological
safety itself. Based on these analyses, we identify promising avenues by
which psychological safety theory could be further extended.
    Third, prior research has rarely theorized or empirically tested the
contingencies that may influence the relative importance of psychologi-
cal safety. Yet, understanding the boundary conditions of psychological
safety validities within its nomological network is crucial to advance a
more rigorous, accurate, and meaningful theory of this increasingly im-
portant construct (Seibert, Wang, & Courtright, 2011). To address this
issue, we first examine whether research design characteristics have an
effect on validities within the nomological network. Further, we extend
our examination to substantive contingencies by exploring the influence
of national culture on psychological safety effect sizes. Specifically, we
examine uncertainty avoidance (UA) as a theory-driven moderator of the
effect sizes in the nomological network. Researchers have long proposed
that national culture may influence important work outcomes in organiza-
tions (Taras, Kirkman, & Steel, 2010), and recent calls have been made to
examine the role of national culture in psychological safety perceptions
(Edmondson & Lei, 2014). Accordingly, our study contributes to a more
contextualized understanding of psychological safety.
    Finally, we examine and compare the effect sizes of the antecedents
and outcomes of psychological safety across individual and group levels
of analysis. Though researchers generally treat psychological safety as
homologous across different levels of analysis, this assumption has re-
mained largely untested (Edmondson & Lei, 2014). If this assumption
is not supported by empirical evidence, psychological safety theory may
require further development before generalizing inferences drawn from
one level of analysis to other levels. In the next section, we begin by
conceptualizing the psychological safety construct.

                   Psychological Safety Conceptualized

    Schein and Bennis (1965) introduced psychological safety as a criti-
cal part of the “unfreezing” process required for organizational learning
and change. They proposed that psychological safety reduces perceived
threats, removes barriers to change, and creates a context which “en-
courages provisional tries and which tolerates failure without retaliation,
renunciation, or guilt” (p. 45). Kahn (1990) suggested that psychological
safety was a condition necessary for people to feel attachments to—and
engagement in—their work roles. He defined it as “feeling able to show

116                     PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


and employ one’s self without fear of negative consequences to self-image,
status, or career” (p. 708).
     More recently, Edmondson (1999) defined psychological safety as a
shared belief that the team is safe for interpersonal risk taking. Thus,
whereas Schein and colleagues (Schein, 1993; Schein & Bennis, 1965)
and Kahn (1990) focus on individual perceptions of psychological safety,
Edmondson’s (1999) initial work casts psychological safety as a group-
level construct. Although these seminal works emerge from disparate
literatures and speak to different levels of analysis, they should not be seen
as competing viewpoints but rather as complementary views of the same
construct. Indeed, these conceptualizations of the psychological safety
construct converge around a single, unifying principle: the importance
of creating a workplace in which perceptions of interpersonal risk are
minimized. As noted by Edmondson and Lei (2014), “a central theme in
research on psychological safety—across decades and levels of analysis—
is that it facilitates the willing contribution of ideas and actions to a shared
enterprise” (p. 24).

Similar Constructs

    Psychological safety represents a cognitive state that is unique from a
number of related states examined in the organizational sciences. We de-
lineate the similarities and differences between psychological safety and
three related and commonly studied constructs: psychological empower-
ment, work engagement, and trust. Psychological empowerment repre-
sents an intrinsic motivational state in which employees feel they have a
sense of control over their work (Spreitzer, 1995). It is comprised of four
cognitions: meaning, self-determination, competence, and impact. Work
engagement refers to a cognitive state in which individuals invest their
personal resources and energies into their work roles and tasks (Christian,
Garza, & Slaughter, 2011; Kahn, 1990).
    Although psychological empowerment, work engagement, and psy-
chological safety all represent positive motivational states toward one’s
work, they are distinct in that psychological empowerment and work
engagement refer to one’s cognitions about their specific jobs or tasks
(Spreitzer, 1995). Psychological safety, on the other hand, refers to per-
ceptions of the broader social and work environment, and how people
perceive that others in the workplace will respond to risk-taking behav-
iors (Carmeli & Gittell, 2009). Thus, it represents perceptions one holds
of the environment in which they work rather than about their specific
jobs or tasks.
    Another noteworthy construct is trust, defined as the willingness to be
vulnerable to the actions of others (Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995).

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                          117


Like psychological safety, trust captures elements of vulnerability and risk
one perceives in the workplace (Edmondson, 2004). Indeed, Edmondson
(1999) noted the similarities between trust and psychological safety in
her seminal work. However, Edmondson (2004) differentiated the two
constructs by highlighting the focus of each constructs. Specifically, trust
captures one’s willingness to be vulnerable to others, thus demarcating
one’s willingness to give the other person the benefit of the doubt. Psycho-
logical safety, on the other hand, captures the extent to which one believes
that others will give them the benefit of the doubt when taking risks (Ed-
mondson, 2004). In sum, although psychological safety exhibits some
conceptual similarities to other cognitive states often examined in organi-
zational research, it is also conceptually unique in capturing perceptions
of risk taking in the workplace.

            The Nomological Network of Psychological Safety

    In this section, we review extant theory and empirical research to
provide a framework for formulating and testing the nomological network
of the psychological safety construct. In doing so, we also aim to provide
a platform to assess the relative effectiveness of each group of antecedent
variables, as well as each variable within a group, in bringing about
psychological safety.

Antecedents of Psychological Safety

    Kahn (1990) very broadly identified four antecedents to psycholog-
ical safety: interpersonal relationships, group dynamics, leadership, and
organizational norms. Beyond these contextual factors, Kahn (1990) also
recognized the potential influence of individual differences and called for
researchers to explore the impact of dispositional factors on psycholog-
ical safety. Recent theoretical and empirical works have answered this
call (e.g., Edmondson & Mogelof, 2005). Several personality traits re-
lated to learning, risk taking, and self-expression have been posited to
impact psychological safety. For instance, a trait commonly associated
with psychological safety is proactive personality, which reflects a stable
disposition toward engaging in proactive behaviors, largely unaffected by
situational forces (Bateman & Crant, 1993). Proactive individuals take
it upon themselves to enact change, detect problems, and subsequently
solve those problems (Crant, 2000; Seibert, Crant, & Kraimer, 1999). As
such, those with more proactive personalities are less likely to perceive
a situation as being psychologically unsafe—even if contextual factors
suggest otherwise (Chan, 2006). For instance, Detert and Burris (2007)
found that proactive personality was a significant predictor of subordinate

118                      PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


perceptions of psychological safety beyond the influence of satisfaction
and leadership.
    Of the Big Five personality constructs, two have been theoretically
linked to psychological safety: emotional stability and openness to ex-
perience. Emotionally stable individuals are more likely to perceive a
psychologically safe environment because they tend to be calm, relaxed,
and secure as opposed to anxious, hostile, and vulnerable to stress (Costa
& McCrae, 1992; Judge, Bono, & Locke, 2000). Additionally, individu-
als that are open to new experiences tend to be curious and imaginative
with a preference for novelty (Costa & McCrae, 1992). As mentioned by
Edmondson and Mogelof (2005), “being open to new ideas and different
ways of doing things may increase the likelihood that individuals would
feel safe taking risks and exposing their vulnerabilities in a work envi-
ronment” (p. 118). Indeed, a study of the impact of personality on risk
taking found that openness was a predictor of risk taking in one’s career
(Nicholson, Soane, Fenton-O’Creevy, & Willman, 2005).
    Finally, learning orientation is a stable dispositional construct that is
characterized by a focus on increasing competence and developing new
skills (Dweck, 1986). Those with a learning orientation view making
mistakes as a necessary and important part of their self-development, and
indeed, this dispositional construct has been shown to positively affect
psychological safety at both the individual (Chiu, Leung, Kong, & Lee,
2011) and group levels (Wilkens & London, 2006). To summarize, we put
forth the following hypothesis:

      Hypothesis 1: Psychological safety is positively related to (a) proac-
                    tive personality, (b) emotional stability, (c) openness to
                    experience, and (d) learning orientation.

    Both Kahn (1990) and Edmondson (1999) identify positive relation-
ships with leaders as having a crucial influence on perceptions of psy-
chological safety. Relationships with leaders signal key information to
employees concerning support, resilience, consistency, trust, and compe-
tence (Kahn, 1990). Further, the social exchanges between leaders and
followers have a crucial impact on the formalization of expectations re-
garding what is and is not appropriate behavior (Edmondson, 2004). As
such, it is no surprise that a variety of leadership constructs have been
examined as precursors to psychological safety, including transforma-
tional leadership (e.g., Detert & Burris, 2007), ethical leadership (e.g.,
Walumbwa & Schaubroeck, 2009), servant leadership (e.g., Schaubroeck,
Lam, & Peng, 2011), leader–member exchange (Coombe, 2010), trust in
one’s leader (e.g., Madjar & Ortiz-Walters, 2009), and management style
(e.g., Halbesleben & Rathert, 2008). Thus, we expect the following:

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                           119


   Hypothesis 2: Psychological safety is positively related to positive
                 leader relations.
     Work design characteristics may also play an important role in shaping
the psychological safety of individuals and teams. Though work design
characteristics are not explicitly part of Kahn’s (1990) theoretical model
of psychological safety antecedents, Edmondson (1999) included such
structural features and resources as facilitators of psychological safety.
According to job characteristics theory (JCT), work design characteristics
have a significant impact on employee psychological states (Hackman
& Oldham, 1976). As such, these characteristics are expected to impact
psychological safety by signaling to employees that they can be trusted
to make important decisions (i.e., autonomy) and by giving employees a
clear understanding of their role expectations (i.e., role clarity). Finally,
interdependent work should be positively related to psychological safety
as it becomes more crucial that employees rely on each other to accomplish
their tasks (Edmondson, 1999). Therefore, we expect the following:
   Hypothesis 3: Psychological safety is positively related to the work
                 design characteristics of (a) autonomy, (b) interdepen-
                 dence, and (c) role clarity.
    Recognizing that interpersonal relationships extend beyond the leader
and that the entirety of the social exchange system influences psycholog-
ical safety, Kahn’s (1990) work included constructs designed to capture
the overall supportive work context. This support can come from peers
and the organization itself. Just as leaders transmit important information
to employees regarding norms and appropriate workplace behaviors, em-
ployees often look to their peers and other workers for cues (Van Maanen
& Schein, 1977; Wiesenfeld, Raghuram, & Garud, 2001). As such, a va-
riety of variables capturing the quality of interpersonal relationships with
peers have been linked with psychological safety, including support from
team members (Schepers, de Jong, Wetzels, & de Ruyter, 2008), team car-
ing (Bstieler & Hemmert, 2010), and trust in team members (Zhang, Fang,
Wei, & Chen, 2010). In addition, research has shown that employees de-
velop global conceptualizations of the extent to which the organization—
as a whole—is a supportive entity (Eisenberger, Huntington, Hutchison,
& Sowa, 1986). Here as well, variables such as organizational support
(Tucker, 2007) and trust in the organization (Carmeli & Zisu, 2009) have
been positively linked to psychological safety. Taken together, we expect
that:
   Hypothesis 4: Psychological safety is positively related to supportive
                 work context.

120                     PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


Outcomes of Psychological Safety

    To determine which outcomes are most relevant to psychological
safety, we drew primarily from theory in the works of Schein and Bennis
(1965), Kahn (1990), and Edmondson (1999). Schein and Bennis (1965),
along with Edmondson (1999), identified psychological safety as a cog-
nitive state necessary for learning and change to take place. From the
learning and change perspective, a number of behavioral outcomes may
result, most notably learning behaviors, information sharing, citizenship
behaviors, and creativity. Kahn’s (1990) work focused more on the motiva-
tional and attitudinal outcomes of psychological safety, with engagement
and important job attitudes (i.e., commitment and satisfaction) being pri-
mary outcomes of relevance. To complement this stream of motivational
outcomes, subsequent theoretical work also identifies task performance
as an outcome of psychological safety (Nembhard & Edmondson, 2011).
Hence, we focus on these most theoretically relevant outcomes in the
following section.
    An outcome of psychological safety that has received considerable
attention is that of work engagement. Kahn’s (1990) work cast psycho-
logical safety as a condition necessary for work engagement, defined as
“the harnessing of organization members’ selves to their work roles; in en-
gagement, people employ and express themselves physically, cognitively,
and emotionally during role performances” (p. 694). Subsequent work
has drawn from Kahn’s efforts to cast engagement as a motivational state
that emerges when one feels safe to engage in their work without fear of
negative consequences (e.g., Edmondson & Lei, 2014; Kahn, 1992; May,
Gilson, & Harter, 2004). This reduction in fear of negative consequences,
which is the primary focus of the psychological safety construct, is crucial
to fostering employee investment of physical, emotional, and cognitive re-
sources into their work (Christian et al., 2011). Therefore, we posit the
following:

      Hypothesis 5: Psychological safety is positively related to work en-
                    gagement.

    Several studies have demonstrated that psychological safety has a di-
rect impact on task performance (e.g., Baer & Frese, 2003; Schaubroeck
et al., 2011). Psychological safety minimizes the potential negative ram-
ifications of making mistakes or taking initiative (Edmondson, 1999),
which should allow employees and groups to focus on the tasks that lead
to improved performance (Faraj & Yan, 2009; Mayer & Gavin, 2005).
Therefore, we posit the following:

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                          121


   Hypothesis 6: Psychological safety is positively related to task per-
                 formance.

    Psychological safety has been linked to several behavioral outcomes
as well. Drawing from Edmondson and colleagues’ research (Edmond-
son, 1999; Edmondson & Lei, 2014), information sharing among group
members has been identified as one of the primary processes by which
change and learning occurs in organizations. However, in order for in-
formation sharing to take place, employees must perceive that the work
context provides an environment in which collaboration and feedback
seeking is accepted and encouraged (Nembhard & Edmondson, 2011).
Empirical research at both the individual (e.g., Siemsen, Roth, Balasub-
ramanian, & Anand, 2009) and group levels (Bunderson & Boumgarden,
2010) has found that psychological safety is positively related to sharing
of information.
    Citizenship behaviors—behaviors that are outside of role prescriptions
but aid in group and organizational functioning (Organ, 1988)—have also
been examined as outcomes of psychological safety. Additionally, voice
behavior, the discretionary citizenship behavior of making suggestions for
improvement to current work practices and policies (Liang, Farh, & Farh,
2012; Van Dyne & LePine, 1998), is an outcome widely linked with psy-
chological safety. There are potential risks associated with speaking up and
employees must assess these risks before deciding whether to voice their
opinion (Detert & Burris, 2007; Frazier & Bowler, 2015; Frazier & Fainsh-
midt, 2012). Because psychological safety creates a context where taking
interpersonal risks is encouraged (Edmondson, 1999), employees are more
likely to feel that they are safe to speak up, make suggestions, and chal-
lenge the current way of doing things (Walumbwa & Schaubroeck, 2009).
    Creativity (i.e., the generation of novel ideas; Amabile, 1998) is an-
other behavioral work outcome that has been posited to be positively
influenced by psychological safety (Madjar & Ortiz-Walters, 2009). Ex-
perimentation that is expected to result from a psychologically safe work
context should result in the generation of novel solutions. Similarly, a be-
havioral outcome identified in early research (e.g., Schein & Bennis, 1965)
and more recent theorizing (e.g., Edmondson, 1999) is learning behav-
ior; the role of psychological safety has widely been recognized for both
individual learning (e.g., Carmeli, Brueller, & Dutton, 2009; Carmeli &
Gittell, 2009) and team learning (e.g., Edmondson, 1999; Wong, Tjosvold,
& Lu, 2010). A psychologically safe workplace allows employees to over-
come the anxiety and fear of failure that is often necessary for learning
to occur (Schein, 1985), enabling employees to focus on improvement
rather than being concerned about how others will react to their actions.
Hence:

122                      PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


      Hypothesis 7: Psychological safety is positively related to (a) infor-
                    mation sharing, (b) citizenship behaviors, (c) creativity,
                    and (d) learning behavior.

    In terms of attitudinal outcomes, when employees feel safe in their
workplace, they are more likely to want to continue in their current jobs
along with their current coworkers. As a desire to remain a part of the orga-
nization in the long-term emerges, employees develop stronger emotional
attachment to the organization (Meyer & Allen, 1991). Thus, psycholog-
ical safety results in higher levels of commitment (e.g., Detert & Burris,
2007; O’Neill & Arendt, 2008). Research on satisfaction in the workplace
has similarly suggested that employees that perceive lower risk in making
mistakes are more likely to be satisfied with their work, as psycholog-
ical safety reduces anxiety and allows them to develop professionally
(Hackman & Oldham, 1976). In sum:

      Hypothesis 8: Psychological safety is positively related to (a) com-
                    mitment and (b) satisfaction.

                   Extending Psychological Safety Research

    As discussed above, we seek to extend psychological safety theory by
addressing four important, unanswered questions. The previous section es-
tablishes the nomological network of psychological safety, thus providing
a framework to examine the relative importance of each antecedent. In this
section, we motivate the four research questions examined in this study.

Incremental Validity of Psychological Safety

    Although empirical research demonstrates that psychological safety
matters, how much it matters, as well as whether it matters in the presence
of related constructs that have also been linked with work outcomes, is
an issue that has yet to be empirically assessed. Therefore, we examine
the incremental influence of psychological safety on two key outcomes
that repeatedly appear in this research stream: task performance and citi-
zenship behavior. First, we explore whether psychological safety explains
incremental variance in these outcomes over and above the antecedents
that impact its emergence. Second, we examine the incremental validity of
psychological safety in the presence of work engagement. Prior research
(e.g., Christian et al., 2011; Edmondson, 1999; Rich, LePine, & Crawford,
2010) implies that although psychological safety and engagement are un-
doubtedly related, psychological safety may entail benefits that extend
beyond its influence on engagement. We empirically assess this notion to

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                           123


more fully understand the relationship between these two variables and
how they influence task performance and citizenship behaviors.

   Research Question 1: Does psychological safety explain variance in
                        task performance and citizenship behaviors
                        over and beyond its nomological network vari-
                        ables?

Moderators of Psychological Safety Validities

    One advantage of meta-analysis is the ability to explore the role of sub-
stantive and methodological moderators in altering effect sizes, which can
facilitate conceptual refinement and extension within the research stream
(Hunter & Schmidt, 2004). Accordingly, we examine whether psycho-
logical safety relationships generalize across different study designs. To
begin, we examine the possibility of publication biases (Hubbard, 1997)
and file-drawer effects (Rosenthal, 1979) by assessing whether there are
differences in effect sizes across published and unpublished papers. In
addition, we explore whether psychological safety relationships are arti-
facts of common method bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff,
2003). We first assess common rater effects by comparing effect sizes
drawn from situations where the same person provided both psychological
safety and the variable of interest with effect sizes drawn from situations
where the relationship was a product of different sources. Then, we as-
sess measurement context effects by comparing effect sizes drawn from
situations where psychological safety and the variable of interest were
collected at the same point in time with situations in which the variables
were collected at different times.
    Next, based on prior meta-analytic findings concerning weak correla-
tions between objective and subjective measures of employee performance
(Bommer, Johnson, Rich, Podsakoff, & Mackenzie, 1995), we also ex-
amine the extent to which the effect sizes of outcome relationships are
dependent on whether the criteria of interest were measured subjectively
(e.g., “manager ratings of performance”) or objectively (e.g., “financial
performance”). Finally, because a sizable number of studies relied on
student samples, we examine the potential influence of student versus
nonstudent samples on effect sizes. Taken together, by assessing the po-
tential impact of these methodological characteristics, we seek to address
the following question:

   Research Question 2: Do research design characteristics influence ef-
                        fect sizes in the nomological network of psy-
                        chological safety?

124                     PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


     As discussed previously, very little is known about the ways in which
national culture might influence the effect sizes between psychological
safety and its nomological network. However, Edmondson and Lei (2014)
call for research in this area and note that “employees in certain cultures
may be particularly hesitant to ask questions, provide feedback, or openly
disagree with their superiors” (p. 8), all behaviors that are theoretically af-
filiated with psychological safety. In other words, it is likely that validities
within the nomological network of psychological safety are contingent
upon the cultural context within which workplace interpersonal exchange
takes place. We heed this call and examine the moderating role of uncer-
tainty avoidance (UA) on the nomological network effect sizes.
     UA is the extent to which members of society are threatened by (i.e.,
high UA) or tolerate (i.e., low UA) uncertainty and ambiguity in the
workplace (Hofstede, 1980). Given the focus of UA on risk and ambi-
guity tolerance, as well as on behaviors that challenge the status quo,
it is particularly relevant to psychological safety. However, most of the
development of psychological safety theory (and most of the empirical
research) has occurred in countries with low UA. It therefore remains un-
clear whether and how much this construct is relevant in countries where
deviations from status quo are less accepted. High UA may countervail
the positive effects of psychological safety on work outcomes. On the
other hand, psychological safety may be particularly salient in cultures
where interpersonal risk taking is not the norm. Likewise, questions re-
main concerning the emergence of psychological safety across different
cultural contexts: Are antecedent predictive validities stable—in terms of
both absolute and relative magnitudes—across high and low UA contexts?
To explore these potential implications of national cultural context, we ask
the following question:

   Research Question 3: Does UA influence effect sizes in the nomolog-
                        ical network of psychological safety?

Homology Across Levels of Analysis

    In aggregating research on the nomological network of psycholog-
ical safety, we uncovered a critical underlying assumption in the field:
Researchers have generally assumed homology across levels of analysis.
Indeed, a recent conceptual review of the psychological safety literature
noted similarities in findings across levels of analysis (i.e., Edmondson &
Lei, 2014). This is consistent with Kahn’s and Edmondson’s similar views
of the psychological safety construct. To illustrate, such similarity implies
that psychological safety would have a similar impact on outcomes, re-
gardless of whether psychological safety is measured at the individual

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                            125


level or as a group climate variable based on shared employee percep-
tions of their workplace (e.g., Chan, 1998; Zohar & Luria, 2005). This
assumption, to our knowledge, has never been empirically tested.
    Rousseau (1985) warns researchers of committing this cross-level fal-
lacy, assuming constructs maintain theoretical equivalence across levels
of analysis or that relationships observed at one level are homologous
across different levels of analysis. As Chen and colleagues note, “[t]he
assumption of homology is often made but rarely tested . . . Tests of ho-
mology can and should play an integral role in the validation of multilevel
constructs and theories” (Chen, Bliese, & Mathieu, 2005, p. 378). In or-
der to clarify the nature of psychological safety across different levels of
analysis, we build on Edmondson and Lei’s (2014) qualitative assessment
of the literature and set forth the following question:

   Research Question 4: Does psychological safety demonstrate homol-
                        ogy across levels?

                                   Method

    We conducted a six-pronged search strategy for identifying research
to include in our meta-analysis. First, we performed electronic searches of
the Google Scholar, ABI/Inform Scholarly Journals, PsycInfo, and Web
of Science databases using the keywords “psychological safety.” Sec-
ond, because Edmondson’s psychological safety scale is overwhelmingly
used to operationalize safety, we also used the online databases to iden-
tify any article that cited Edmondson (1999). Third, we supplemented
our online search with a manual, targeted search of the following manage-
ment, psychology, and organizational behavior journals: Academy of Man-
agement Journal, Administrative Science Quarterly, Journal of Applied
Psychology, Journal of Management, Journal of Organizational Behav-
ior, Leadership Quarterly, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, Personnel Psychology, and Strategic Management Journal. In
order to include unpublished work, we searched for dissertations in Pro-
quest and scholarly conference programs for presented papers. Next, we
posted requests for unpublished work on listservs from the Academy of
Management and the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychol-
ogy. Finally, when relevant articles were coded, we skimmed through
reference sections in search for additional studies. In all, our literature
search resulted in 457 studies for potential inclusion in our meta-analysis.
    For the study to be included in our sample, it had to meet three criteria.
First, the study had to empirically assess psychological safety in a manner
theoretically consistent with our conceptualization of the construct. Most
often, Edmondson’s (1999) psychological safety scale or some version of

126                    PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


it was used. In cases where ad hoc scales were developed or other scales
were used, we examined the authors’ theoretical definitions to ensure
that they were appropriate for inclusion. For example, May et al. (2004)
drew from the work of Kahn (1990) and Edmondson (1999) to develop
their scale, which captured the extent to which employees perceived their
workplace was safe for risk taking. Therefore, it was included in our
analysis. On the other hand, a number of studies used the term “psycho-
logical safety” when measuring perceptions of occupational safety held
by employees of an organization. For example, Morrow et al. (2010) de-
fined psychological safety climate as “a specific type of climate defined
as an employee’s perception of the value or priority of safety at his or
her workplace” (p. 1461). This clearly captures elements of occupational
safety that is beyond the scope of Edmondson’s (1999) conceptualization
of psychological safety.
    A second criterion was that the study had to report the statistical in-
formation necessary to conduct our meta-analyses (i.e., sample sizes and
effect sizes—either correlations or statistics convertible to correlations).
Finally, only primary studies were included; archival studies and reex-
aminations of previous datasets were excluded to ensure independence of
data sets. Through our literature search and inclusion process, we were
able to narrow the pool of relevant studies down to 117 studies represent-
ing 136 independent samples. The final sample consisted of 78 published
studies, 21 doctoral dissertations, and 18 unpublished working papers or
conference presentations, which are indicated with an asterisk in the ref-
erences section and in the supplementary material that accompanies this
manuscript.

Coding Procedures

    We utilized a combination of theory-driven and data-driven approaches
to create a categorization scheme for coding articles. We started by draw-
ing from the theoretical frameworks of psychological safety to create
broad, hierarchical lists of antecedents and outcomes of psychological
safety. In developing the categories for coding, we made every effort
to balance parsimony and theoretical considerations. For example, vari-
ables used in past research on psychological safety to capture positive
leader relations include, but are not limited to, trust in leader, transforma-
tional leadership, and leader-member exchange (LMX). A common theme
running through these variables is that they capture employee perceptions
of their leader and a higher score on each is indicative of more positive
perceptions of their relationship with the leader.
    Similarly, our categories of “work design characteristics” and “sup-
portive work context” were classified with both theory and parsimony as

                          M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                127


considerations. Consistent with Seibert et al. (2011) and Hong, Liao, Hu,
and Jiang (2013), our meta-analysis aggregated variables including auton-
omy, flexibility, job enrichment, and task complexity into a broad “work
design characteristics” category. “Supportive work context” captured the
extent to which the organization and coworkers are supportive, including
variables such as trust in coworkers, perceived organizational support,
conflict, and social support. Once the category scheme was finalized, all
study articles were coded. As we analyzed each article, we coded any
relationship between psychological safety and a study variable that was
included in our predetermined categories.1
    To assess the impact of methodological moderators on effect sizes,
each relationship was also coded to fit into moderator analyses schemes. In
particular, relationships were coded as being based on either “published”
or “unpublished” studies and “student” or “nonstudent” samples. Next,
relationships were coded as being collected by the “same source” (e.g.,
the focal employee provided both the measure of psychological safety and
the criteria of interest) or by “different sources” (e.g., the focal employee
provided the measure of psychological safety but the supervisor provided
the criteria of interest). Likewise, relationships were coded as “same time”
if both variables were collected at the same point in time or “different
time” if there was a lag between the collection of variables. Finally, a
distinction was made for “objective criteria” (e.g., financial indices of
team performance) and “subjective criteria” (e.g., manager perceptions of
team performance).
    To assess the moderating role of UA, the country in which the studies
were conducted was coded to create our cultural moderator. We desig-
nated the sample countries into high and low UA based on whether they
were above or below the median UA score for all available countries in
Taras et al.’s (2012) meta-analysis of Hofstede’s national cultural dimen-
sion scores. High UA countries include Belgium, Germany, Israel, Japan,
Mexico, and Spain. Low UA countries include Australia, Canada, China,
Hong Kong, Ireland, Netherlands, Scotland, Singapore, Sweden, Taiwan,
Thailand, and the United States.
    To ensure coding reliability and accuracy, studies were coded by
dyads of the research team. Each member of the dyad coded the articles
independently, and then the dyad met to compare coding. Consensus
ranged from 84% (for coding variable reliabilities) to 100% (for coding
whether studies were published or unpublished). The overall consensus
rate through this coding process was 91%. When discrepancies arose, the
dyad would meet to determine if the disagreement could be resolved with

  1
    The coding scheme employed and the specific variables included from each study are
available from the first author upon request.

128                    PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


information in the study. If not, a third member of the research team,
not involved in initial coding of the article, was brought in to help with
resolution. All discrepancies and disagreements were eventually resolved
through discussion.

Meta-Analytic Calculations

     In conducting our meta-analytic calculations, we followed the proce-
dures established by Hunter and Schmidt (2004). Our results aggregate
sample-size-weighted mean estimates of the correlations (r). When a study
included multiple measures of a single variable (i.e., two variables that
could be classified under the same category), and variable intercorrela-
tions were available, a composite correlation was calculated. When inter-
correlations were not available, the variable correlations were averaged to
ensure that each sample only contributed at most one effect size for each
meta-analytic calculation.
     We also report validity estimates—population correlation coefficients
(ρ̂s)—which reflect meta-analyzed correlations corrected for unreliabil-
ity. In order to create these corrected correlations, we collected interitem
reliability estimates (Cronbach’s α) when available. As suggested by
Kepes, McDaniel, Brannick, and Banks (2013), when no reliability es-
timates were reported for a given variable, its reliability was imputed
based on the average reliability calculated from studies that did report
reliability information. Additionally, we report 95% confidence intervals
around each population estimate as well as the percentage of variance
explained by study artifacts for each correlation. Hunter and Schmidt
(2004) propose that moderators are likely present if artifacts do not ac-
count for at least 75% of the variance in the correlations. Based on
previous research, we set the minimum number of primary studies to
justify performing a meta-analysis of the data at three (Chambless &
Hollon, 1998; Seibert et al., 2011) except in the case of more specific
constructs within the broad category, where we set the minimum to two
studies.
     As a test for moderators, we conducted weighted regression analyses
with random effects models, as recommended by Geyskens, Krishnan,
Steenkamp, and Cunha (2009). This technique accounts for the poten-
tial that there are correlations between moderators and also that our sets
of studies are not identical in their methods or sample characteristics
(Borenstein, Hedges, Higgins, & Rothstein, 2010). For each relationship
between psychological safety and its nomological network, we included
the moderators in the regression if there were at least three studies for each
moderator category. Similarly, to explore our research question concern-
ing the homology of relationships across levels, we conducted separate

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                            129


metaregressions for each relationship in which we had at least three studies
at both levels with level as the moderator. For all metaregression analyses,
we used the package “metafor” in R (Viechtbauer, 2010).
    Finally, to explore incremental validity, we followed the procedures
outlined by Dudley, Orvis, Lebiecki, and Cortina (2006). First, we created
different metacorrelation matrices for the set of meta-analytic effect sizes
considered in each analysis. Estimates of the relationships between an-
tecedents and psychological safety as well as estimates of the relationships
between psychological safety and outcomes were drawn from the current
study. Previous meta-analyses supplied estimates of the relationships be-
tween antecedents and outcomes. It should be noted that we were unable
to test some of the antecedents due to a lack of previous meta-analyses to
provide the estimates (e.g., learning orientation on citizenship behavior).
We were also only able to assess these relationships at the individual level
due to a lack of data for the group-level analysis. To ensure that findings
were not biased by different artifact corrections employed across different
meta-analyses, raw, sample-weighted effect sizes (r) were extracted from
each study and then corrected for unreliability in both the predictor and
the criterion using equal estimates.
    Hierarchical regression was employed to assess the relative contri-
bution of psychological safety. First, the criterion (task performance or
OCB) was regressed on the predictor (Step 1). Then, the criterion was
regressed on the set including both the predictor and psychological safety
(Step 2). The change in the amount of variance explained (R2 ) between
Steps 1 and 2 was used to explore the incremental validity of psycholog-
ical safety. Finally, the ordering of independent variables was swapped
such that psychological safety was entered in Step 1 and the predictor was
added in Step 2 to explore whether the predictor captured variance in the
outcome above and beyond psychological safety.

                                   Results

Nomological Network

   Individual level of analysis. Table 1 presents the meta-analytic cor-
relations within the nomological network of psychological safety at the
individual level of analysis. With regard to antecedents, Hypothesis 1 was
partially supported as we found that three of the four personality variables
were related to psychological safety. Proactive personality (ρ̂ = .35), emo-
tional stability (ρ̂ = .17), and learning orientation (ρ̂ = .24) were positive
and significantly related. Contrary to expectations, openness to experi-
ence was not significantly related to psychological safety. Hypothesis 2
was supported as psychological safety and positive leader relations were

130                        PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


                                    TABLE 1
              Meta-Analysis of Individual-Level Psychological Safety

Variable                              k       N        r̄    ρ̂     CIL     CIU    %-Acc
Antecedents
  Proactive personality               6      4,830    .30   .35     .19      .51      3.88
  Emotional stability                 8      2,936    .14   .17     .07      .27     17.04
  Openness to experience              5      2,249    .03   .03    −.11      .18     11.90
  Learning orientation                6      1,172    .19   .24     .12      .37     28.81
  Positive leader relations          30     10,180    .37   .44     .39      .50     14.34
    Inclusive leadership              5      2,383    .27   .36     .30      .42     51.79
    LMX                               2        554    .28   .38     .30      .45    100.00
    Transformational leadership       4      3,829    .38   .42     .36      .48     24.80
    Trust in leadership               6      1,280    .32   .39     .31      .47     48.44
  Work design characteristics        26      5,768    .41   .53     .40      .66      4.56
    Autonomy                          8      1,661    .38   .47     .30      .65      9.36
    Interdependence                   5      1,651    .62   .86     .64     1.00      3.57
    Role clarity                      6      1,017    .48   .63     .48      .78     15.19
  Supportive work context            24      5,045    .40   .49     .39      .59      8.28
    Peer support                      6      1,293    .50   .62     .38      .86      5.40
Outcomes
  Engagement                         13      3,676    .36   .45      .34     .56     10.50
  Task performance                   18      4,061    .35   .43      .31     .56      7.44
  Information sharing                19      3,427    .42   .52      .40     .63      8.70
  Citizenship behaviors              16      7,275    .28   .32      .27     .37     25.64
     Voice                            8      4,758    .27   .31      .26     .35     44.01
  Creativity                         10      4,567    .11   .13      .06     .21     20.76
  Learning behaviors                 15      4,648    .48   .62      .51     .73      7.21
  Commitment                         18      4,811    .39   .48      .38     .57      9.59
  Satisfaction                       20      8,245    .42   .53      .46     .60      9.25

Note. k = number of correlations. N = cumulative sample size. r̄= estimated mean corre-
lation. ρ̂= estimated corrected correlation. CIL and CIU denote lower and upper limits of a
95% confidence interval. %-Acc = percentage of variance accounted for by sampling error.



significantly related (ρ̂ = .44). Also, in Table 1, we examined the effect
sizes of four specific facets of leadership and all were similar in magni-
tude, ranging from .36 for inclusive leadership to .42 for transformational
leadership. Hypotheses 3 and 4 were also supported, as the relationships
between psychological safety and autonomy (ρ̂ = .47), interdependence
(ρ̂ = .86), role clarity (ρ̂ = .63), and supportive work context (ρ̂ = .49)
were all significant and positive.
    Hypothesis 5 was supported as psychological safety was positively
and significantly related to work engagement (ρ̂ = .45). Hypothesis 6
indicated that psychological safety would be positively related to task
performance and this was supported by our results (ρ̂ = .43). Hypothesis
7 was supported as the mean corrected correlations were significant for

                           M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                    131


                                    TABLE 2
                Meta-Analysis of Group-Level Psychological Safety

Variable                              k        N        r̄    ρ̂    CIL     CIU    %-Acc
Antecedents
  Learning orientation                6       354     .32    .40     .15    .65      21.26
  Positive leader relations          16     1,583     .34    .39     .28    .50      21.04
    Transformational leadership       4       543     .32    .38     .24    .51      38.83
    Trust in leader                   2       297     .38    .44     .34    .54      96.28
  Work design characteristics        26     1,880     .27    .35     .25    .44      29.42
    Autonomy                          2       172     .27    .35     .21    .49     100.00
    Interdependence                   6       339     .28    .40     .21    .59      43.29
    Role clarity                      7       413     .41    .51     .37    .65      44.64
  Supportive work context            18     1,449     .41    .51     .40    .61      23.94
    Peer support                      5       586     .49    .57     .48    .66      55.60
    Organizational support            4       253     .34    .44     .13    .76      18.67
Outcomes
  Engagement                          4       264     .32    .44     .17    .70      28.63
  Task performance                   33     2,802     .24    .29     .20    .38      22.13
  Information sharing                 9       644     .41    .50     .32    .67      20.75
  Creativity                          8       841     .24    .29     .14    .44      25.50
  Learning behaviors                 21     1,686     .42    .52     .44    .60      34.98
  Satisfaction                        4       299     .49    .69     .42    .97      18.55

Note. k = number of correlations. N = cumulative sample size. r̄= estimated mean corre-
lation. ρ̂= estimated corrected correlation. CIL and CIU denote lower and upper limits of a
95% confidence interval. %-Acc = percentage of variance accounted for by sampling error.



all behavioral outcome variables, demonstrating a positive and significant
relationship with information sharing (ρ̂ = .52), citizenship behaviors
(ρ̂ = .32), creativity (ρ̂ = .13), and learning behavior (ρ̂ = .62). Finally,
Hypothesis 8 received support as the mean corrected correlations between
psychological safety and both commitment (ρ̂ = .48) and satisfaction
(ρ̂ = .53) were significant and in the expected direction.
   Group level of analysis. We were unable to assess a number of our hy-
potheses at the group level because of the reduced number of studies that
have been conducted. The results of this analysis are presented in Table
2. With regard to personality variables at the group level, only learning
orientation had enough of a sample size and it was positively related
to psychological safety (ρ̂ = .40), providing support for Hypothesis 1d.
Similar to the individual level, we found that positive leader relations
(ρ̂ = .39), autonomy (ρ̂ = .35), interdependence (ρ̂ = .40), role clarity
(ρ̂ = .51), and supportive work context (ρ̂ = .51) were all positively and
significantly related to psychological safety, supporting Hypotheses 2–4.
Within positive leader relations, the effect sizes of transformational lead-
ership and trust in leader were again similar to the broad category, whereas

132                    PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


peer support resulted in the largest effect size within the supportive work
context category.
    Hypothesis 5 was again supported as psychological safety was signif-
icantly and positively related to work engagement (ρ̂ = .44). Hypothesis
6 was supported at the group level as psychological safety was positively
related to task performance (ρ̂ = .29). We did not have enough primary
studies to examine citizenship behaviors, but we found that information
sharing (ρ̂ = .50), creativity (ρ̂ = .29), and learning behavior (ρ̂ = .52)
were significantly related to psychological safety, supporting Hypothe-
ses 7a, 7c, and 7d. We were not able to examine the relationship with
commitment at the group level but did find that satisfaction (ρ̂ = .69)
was significantly related to psychological safety, providing support for
Hypothesis 8b.
   Incremental validity analysis. The analysis for task performance is pre-
sented in Table 3. Here, psychological safety predicts incremental variance
in task performance over and above all of the variables included in the anal-
ysis. We also conducted analyses to examine the other constructs’ ability
to predict incremental variance over and above psychological safety. For
emotional stability, proactive personality, autonomy, and peer support, no
additional variance was predicted beyond psychological safety, and for all
other constructs, the incremental variance predicted beyond psychological
safety was .10 or below.
    Table 4 presents the incremental validity analysis for organizational
citizenship behaviors. Again, for all of the variables from the nomological
network that we were able to examine, psychological safety predicted
variance in the outcome over and above each individual construct, though
the amount of incremental variance is not as strong in most cases. Ad-
ditionally, for the majority of the variables, psychological safety predicts
more incremental variance than the other variables do when psychologi-
cal safety is added first to the analysis. Only LMX and autonomy predict
an equal or more incremental variance in organizational citizenship be-
havior over and above psychological safety. In sum, these results show
that psychological safety does explain unique variance in both outcomes
over and beyond each of the nomological network variables, providing an
affirmative response to Research Question 1.

                            Moderator Analyses

    Examining percentages of variance accounted for by sampling error,
it was clear that subgroup heterogeneity existed within our nomological
network categorization scheme. At the individual level and at the group
level, sampling error for every construct category accounted for less than
75% of the variance in the effect sizes. Thus, when sample size allowed

                                                              TABLE 3
           Hierarchical Regression Analyses: Incremental Validity of Psychological Safety as a Predictor of Job Performance

Variable                                       Source                     N           r̄x       r̄y       ρ̂x       ρ̂y       R2       R2 1        R2 2
Antecedents
Positive personality Traits
     Emotional stability                Judge et al. (2013)             4,696        .14       .07       .18       .11       .31         .29         .00
     Openness                           Judge et al. (2013)             3,997        .03       .09       .04       .15       .32         .30         .02
     Proactive personality            Fuller & Marler (2009)            2,478        .30       .15       .37       .23       .31         .26         .00
     Learning orientation               Payne et al. (2007)             1,514        .19       .15       .24       .23       .32         .26         .01
Positive leader relations
     LMX                               Dulebohn et al. (2012)           1,435        .28       .30       .35       .46       .38         .18         .08
     Transformational                  Wang & Leung (2011)              4,616        .38       .19       .46       .28       .31         .23         .01
     Trust in leadership               Colquitt et al. (2007)           2,100        .32       .22       .38       .32       .32         .22         .01
Work design characteristics
     Autonomy                         Humphrey et al. (2007)            3,077        .38       .18       .49       .28       .31         .23         .00
     Interdependence                  Humphrey et al. (2007)            2,296        .62       .14       .81       .22       .46         .41         .15
     Role clarity                     Tubre & Collins (2000)            2,281        .48       .15       .61       .23       .32         .27         .05
Supportive work context
                                                                                                                                                            M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.




     Peer support                  Chiaburu & Harrison (2008)            2,741       .50       .20       .65       .32       .31         .21         .00
     Organizational support       Rhoades & Eisenberger (2002)             515       .63       .16       .76       .23       .38         .33         .08
Proximal outcome
    Engagement                         Christian et al. (2011)          4,068        .36       .36       .43       .53       .41         .13         .10

Note. N = Harmonic mean. r̄x = estimated mean correlation with psychological safety. r̄y = estimated mean correlation with job performance. ρ̂x =
estimated corrected correlation with psychological safety. ρ̂y = estimated corrected correlation with job performance. R2 = variance in job performance
accounted for by the set of psychological safety and predictor. R2 1 = incremental variance in job performance accounted for by psychological safety
beyond predictor. R2 2 = incremental variance in job performance accounted for by predictor beyond psychological safety.
                                                                                                                                                            133

                                                                                                                                                               134

                                                             TABLE 4
Hierarchical Regression Analyses: Incremental Validity of Psychological Safety as a Predictor of Organizational Citizenship Behavior

Variable                                       Source                       N           r̄x       r̄y       ρ̂x       ρ̂y       R2        R2 1        R2 2
Antecedents
Positive personality traits
     Emotional stability                 Judge et al. (2013)              5,449        .14       .13       .18        .17       .14        .11          .01
     Openness                            Judge et al. (2013)              3,664        .03       .03       .04        .04       .13        .13          .00
     Proactive personality             Fuller & Marler (2009)             3,672        .30       .26       .37        .32       .17        .07          .04
Positive leader relations
     LMX                               Dulebohn et al. (2012)             1,446        .28       .34       .35        .42       .23        .05          .10
     Transformational                  Wang & Leung (2011)                5,724        .38       .26       .46        .31       .16        .06          .03
     Trust in leadership               Colquitt et al. (2007)             2,397        .32       .22       .38        .26       .15        .08          .02
Work design characteristics
     Autonomy                           Christian et al. (2011)           1,061        .38       .28       .49        .36       .17        .04          .04
Supportive work context
     Peer support                   Chiaburu & Harrison (2008)            2,593        .50       .14       .65        .18       .13        .10          .01
     Organizational support        Rhoades & Eisenberger (2002)             532        .63       .21       .76        .25       .13        .07          .00
                                                                                                                                                               PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY




Proximal outcome
Engagement                              Christian et al. (2011)           4,391        .36       .26       .44        .31       .16        .06          .03

Note. N = Harmonic mean. r̄x = estimated mean correlation with psychological safety. r̄y = estimated mean correlation with organizational citizenship
behavior. ρ̂x = estimated corrected correlation with psychological safety. ρ̂y = estimated corrected correlation with organizational citizenship behavior.
R2 = variance in organizational citizenship behavior accounted for by the set of psychological safety and predictor. R2 1 = incremental variance in
organizational citizenship behavior accounted for by psychological safety beyond predictor. R2 2 = incremental variance in organizational citizenship
behavior accounted for by predictor beyond psychological safety.

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                           135


(i.e., at least three studies per each level of the moderator category), we
conducted regression analyses to assess potential moderators. The results
of these regression analyses are presented in Tables 5 and 6.
    For individual-level regression analyses, the results show that a ma-
jority of the moderators (24 out of 33; 73%) were not significant. There
were, however, a few instances where study characteristics moderated
psychological safety relationships. Relationships between learning orien-
tation and psychological safety were significantly lower in studies that
used students as participants (ρ̂ = .13) than nonstudents (ρ̂ = .45). Re-
lationships between psychological safety and positive leader relations
were larger when ratings of both variables were provided by the same
source (ρ̂ = .45) than different sources (ρ̂ = .29). For outcomes, both
task performance and citizenship behaviors were more strongly related
to psychological safety in studies that were published (ρ̂ = .54 and .35,
respectively) versus unpublished studies (ρ̂ = .19 and .26, respectively).
Task performance also demonstrated larger effect sizes when the outcome
measure was subjective (ρ̂ = .40) rather than objective (ρ̂ = .07). Finally,
the relationship between satisfaction and psychological safety was signif-
icantly stronger when both were measured at the same point in time (ρ̂ =
.54 vs. .25) and when students were participants (ρ̂ = .77 vs. .50).
    At the group level, we were able to assess fewer moderators due to
sample size restrictions; the majority (14 out of 16; 88%) were nonsignif-
icant. The only significant results emerged for positive leader relations,
where again the effect sizes were smaller when different sources provided
ratings of psychological safety and leadership (ρ̂ = .15) than same sources
(ρ̂ = .44). In addition, effect sizes were smaller when the studies were
unpublished (ρ̂ = .16 vs. .37) for the group-level positive leadership cat-
egory. Overall, we find that there are areas of research design that require
attention, which we discuss later in the manuscript.
    Results regarding the moderating influence of UA are presented in
Table 7. The effect sizes did vary for the majority of the nomological net-
work for which we had enough studies to conduct the subgroup analysis.
Positive personality traits effects were stronger in high UA cultures (ρ̂ =
.54) than for low UA cultures (ρ̂ = .24). Positive leader relations effects
were lower in high UA cultures (ρ̂ = .30) than in low UA cultures (ρ̂ =
.44). Work design characteristics demonstrated a stronger effect in high
UA cultures (ρ̂ = .74) compared to low UA cultures (ρ̂ = .39), as did
supportive work context (ρ̂ = .71 compared to ρ̂ = .35).
    With regard to outcomes, the effect on work engagement was stronger
in high UA cultures (ρ̂ = .58) than in low UA cultures (ρ̂ = .28). Similarly,
the effect on task performance was stronger in high UA cultures (ρ̂ = .78)
compared to low UA cultures (ρ̂ = .29), whereas citizenship behaviors
were similar in both (ρ̂ = .30 to ρ̂ = .34). Learning behaviors effects were

136                       PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


                                   TABLE 5
       Meta-Regression Results for Moderator Analysis—Individual Level

Variable                      Estimate     SE    Z value   p value     QR           QM
Individual level
Emotional stability                                                   96.06∗∗       .94
     Time                       .05        .07      .75      .45
     Published                  .05        .07      .66      .51
Openness                                                              73.86∗∗      2.63
     Time                     −.12         .08   −1.62       .10
Learning orientation                                                   7.21       19.95∗∗
     Time                     −.04         .08    −.47       .64
     Student                   .21∗∗       .08    2.65       .01
Positive leader relations                                            228.40∗∗     14.83∗∗
     Source                   −.33∗∗       .11   −3.08       .01
     Time                     −.13         .07   −1.90       .06
     Published                 .11         .06    1.85       .06
Work design characteristics                                          616.94∗∗       .70
     Published                −.03         .10    −.29       .77
     Student                  −.08         .12    −.68       .50
Supportive work context                                              245.05∗∗      1.49
     Time                     −.07         .12    −.60       .55
     Published                −.04         .10    −.46       .65
     Student                  −.09         .11    −.81       .42
Engagement                                                           149.58∗∗       .01
     Published                −.01         .09    −.09       .93
Information sharing                                                  319.83∗∗       .91
     Published                −.10         .10    −.95      −.30
Task performance                                                      67.42∗∗     35.71∗∗
                                      ∗∗
     Subjective                .19         .06    2.91       .01
     Source                   −.13∗        .06   −2.33       .02
     Time                      .07         .06    1.20       .23
     Published                −.20∗∗       .06   −3.33       .01
     Student                   .12         .06    1.94       .05
Citizenship behavior                                                  55.17∗∗     12.06∗∗
     Source                    .03         .04     .65       .52
     Time                      .03         .06     .60       .55
     Published                −.14∗∗       .04   −3.26       .01
Creativity                                                           211.49∗∗      0.75
     Source                    .02         .10     .22       .82
     Time                     −.08         .12    −.64       .53
     Published                −.09         .12    −.72       .47
Learning behavior                                                    239.30∗∗      3.10
     Time                      .02         .10     .23       .82
     Published                −.18         .11   −1.69       .09
     Student                  −.01         .11    −.02       .99
Commitment                                                           298.74∗∗       .01
     Published                −.01         .08    −.04       .97
                                                                              (Continued)

                              M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                   137


TABLE 5 (continued)

Variable            Estimate       SE        Z value     p value           QR          QM
                                                                                ∗∗
Satisfaction                                                             224.41      12.61∗∗
     Time            −.26∗∗        .09       −2.86           .01
     Published       −.03          .06        −.51           .60
     Student         −.18∗∗        .07       −2.62           .01

Note. Subjective, 1 = yes, 2 = no; Source, 1 = same, 2 = different; Time, 1 = same, 2 =
different; Published, 1 = yes, 2 = no; Student, 1 = yes, 2 = no. Unstandardized estimates
are reported. SE = standard error. QR = Q statistic for residual heterogeneity. QM = Q
statistic for overall moderator model.
∗
  p < .05. ∗∗ p < .01.
                                     TABLE 6
           Meta-Regression Results for Moderator Analysis—Group Level

Variable                        Estimate     SE    Z value     p value       QR        QM
Group level
Learning orientation                                                       36.70∗∗     .46
     Published                     .14       .20       .68         .50
Positive leader relations                                                  38.92∗∗   21.65∗∗
     Source                      −.21    ∗
                                             .09     −2.40         .02
     Time                        −.02        .14     −0.12         .90
     Published                   −.22∗       .11     −2.11         .04
Work design characteristics                                                92.75∗∗    3.18
     Source                      −.10        .13      −.79         .43
     Published                   −.14        .10     −1.43         .15
     Student                     −.04        .12      −.34         .74
Supportive work context                                                   153.08∗∗     .01
     Published                     .01       .11       .09         .93
Task performance                                                          111.15∗∗   22.62∗∗
     Subjective                  −.02        .10      −.21         .83
     Source                      −.12        .08     −1.56         .12
     Time                        −.12        .07     −1.88         .06
     Published                   −.12        .07     −1.71         .09
     Student                      .12        .09      1.38         .17
Learning behavior                                                          65.73∗∗    5.07
     Source                       .09        .09      1.05         .29
     Published                   −.10        .08     −1.22         .22
     Student                      .06        .08       .76         .45

Note. Subjective, 1 = yes, 2 = no; Source, 1 = same, 2 = different; Time, 1 = same, 2 =
different; Published, 1 = yes, 2 = no; Student, 1 = yes, 2 = no. Unstandardized estimates
are reported. SE = standard error. QR = Q statistic for residual heterogeneity. QM = Q
statistic for overall moderator model.
∗
  p < .05. ∗∗ p < .01.

higher in high UA cultures (ρ̂ = .77) compared to low UA cultures (ρ̂ =
.60). Finally, the effect on commitment was higher in high UA cultures
(ρ̂ = .57) compared to low UA cultures (ρ̂ = .41). Taken together, it
appears that psychological safety’s relationships with its nomological

                                                                                                                                                        138




                                                                TABLE 7
                                         Meta-Analysis of Psychological Safety: Cultural Moderator

                                               High uncertainty avoidance                                   Low uncertainty avoidance

Variable                          k      N        r̄     ρ̂      CIL     CIU     %-Acc        k       N       r̄      ρ̂      CIL    CIU      %-Acc
Antecedents
  Positive personality traits     7    2,669     .43     .54     .36      .72      4.93      23     8,603     .20     .24     .17     .31     12.27
  Positive leader relations       4      904     .26     .30     .24      .37    100.00      21     7,994     .37     .44     .39     .50     15.01
  Work design characteristics     4    1,276     .50     .74     .43     1.00      3.36      18     3,003     .30     .39     .25     .54      8.35
  Supportive work context         4      622     .59     .71     .61      .81     35.52      15     2,736     .28     .35     .23     .47     13.87
Outcomes
  Engagement                      5    1,685     .48     .58     .43      .74       8.22      7     1,440     .21     .28     .19     .37     43.52
  Task performance                4    1,217     .65     .78     .61      .95       4.72     13     2,675     .22     .29     .21     .36     33.28
  Citizenship behaviors           3      774     .24     .30     .19      .41      46.05     10     5,190     .30     .34     .27     .40     21.21
  Learning behaviors              6    1,508     .63     .77     .61      .92       6.13      6     2,329     .44     .60     .49     .71     17.46
                                                                                                                                                        PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY




  Commitment                      5    1,669     .47     .57     .42      .72       9.87      9     1,676     .33     .41     .29     .54     18.06

Note. k = number of correlations. N = cumulative sample size. r̄= estimated mean correlation. ρ̂= estimated corrected correlation. CIL and CIU denote
lower and upper limits of a 95% confidence interval. %-Acc = percentage of variance accounted for by sampling error.

                           M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                  139


                                    TABLE 8
           Meta-Regression Results for Tests of Homology Across Levels

Variable                           Estimate   SE     Z value   p value     QR       QM
Individual level
     Learning orientation            0.17     0.10    1.68      0.09      71.33∗∗   2.81
     Positive leader relations      −0.05     0.06   −0.83      0.41     544.76∗∗   0.69
     Work design characteristics    −0.01     0.07   −0.20      0.84     798.80∗∗   0.04
     Supportive work context         0.06     0.06    0.99      0.32     540.07∗∗   0.99
     Engagement                      0.06     0.11    0.56      0.57     197.10∗∗   0.32
     Conflict                        0.05     0.13    0.43      0.67     266.70∗∗   0.19
     Relationship conflict           0.12     0.13    0.89      0.37      87.24∗∗   0.81
     Task conflict                  −0.21     0.17   −1.21      0.23     136.15∗∗   1.47
     Information sharing             0.07     0.10    0.68      0.49     481.12∗∗   0.47
     Task performance               −0.01     0.07   −0.17      0.86     760.55∗∗   0.03
     Creativity                      0.06     0.08    0.82      0.41     258.12∗∗   0.68
     Learning behavior              −0.04     0.06   −0.62      0.53     424.98∗∗   0.39
     Satisfaction                    0.12     0.10    1.25      0.21     424.79∗∗   1.57

Note. Unstandardized regression estimates are reported. SE = standard error. QR = Q
statistic for residual heterogeneity. QM = Q statistic for overall moderator model.
∗
  p < .05. ∗∗ p < .01.


network are impacted by the cultural dimension of UA, a finding we
return to in the discussion.

Homology Across Levels

    Table 8 presents the results of our regression analyses, assessing ho-
mology across levels (when possible) for each relationship between psy-
chological safety and its nomological network. In these analyses, we ran
regressions with the correlations of each study as the dependent variable
and study level as the moderator. As can be seen in Table 8, none of the
relationships examined resulted in a significant coefficient estimate, pro-
viding evidence that the magnitude of the relationships is not significantly
different across levels. Only learning orientation approached statistical
significance as these effects were significant at p < .10. These findings
provide support for the prevalent assumption of homology across both
individual and group levels of analysis.

                                     Discussion

    This study presents the first comprehensive, quantitative review of the
role of psychological safety in the workplace. As such, our work offers
an assessment of the current state of knowledge concerning this impor-
tant workplace construct. In addition, though a review of the literature

140                    PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


and an empirical assessment of the nomological network are useful, our
study extends research on psychological safety by exploring a number of
important questions best captured through meta-analytic techniques. We
discuss the findings of our study in the following sections.

Main Relationships Within the Nomological Network

    Our review of the literature and empirical analysis at the individual
level resulted in support for the majority of the hypothesized relationships.
Contrary to our expectations, however, openness to experience was not
significantly related to psychological safety. Those high in openness to
experience are described as being independent thinkers, amenable to new
ideas, and more likely to challenge the status quo (Zhou & George, 2001).
It may be that those high in openness to experience are more focused on
ways to express their independence regardless of context and thus less
likely to be concerned with psychological safety.
    We found support for the relationship between psychological safety
and positive leader relations as a general category. This highlights the
salience of the direct leader in shaping the work context and crucial role
leaders play in fostering psychological safety. Additionally, within the cat-
egory of positive leader relations, we examined four specific leadership
constructs that have been theoretically linked to psychological safety. The
effect sizes ranged from .36 for inclusive leadership to .42 for transfor-
mational leadership. There is little variation in the extent to which each
of these leadership constructs impacts psychological safety, an issue to
which we return in the future directions section.
    Going beyond the direct leader, we also found that work design char-
acteristics and supportive work context as broad categories both positively
influence psychological safety. Within the category of work design char-
acteristics, interdependence showed the strongest relationship. Peer sup-
port, within the category of supportive work context, also demonstrated
a significant and strong effect. These findings are consistent with Kahn’s
(1990) original theorizing whereby interpersonal relationships and group
dynamics are posited as central drivers of psychological safety percep-
tions. Psychological safety was also found to be significantly related to
a number of outcome variables. We found that psychological safety was
positively related to employee engagement, task performance, satisfac-
tion, and commitment. We found a moderate relationship with citizenship
behavior and a relatively weak one with creativity.
    Given the rapid changes that businesses face in the modern econ-
omy and the seminal work from Edmondson (1999) on psychologi-
cal safety and learning, one of the most relevant findings of our study
is the strong relationship that psychological safety demonstrated with

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                          141


information sharing and learning behavior. These are two important out-
comes in the psychological safety literature and demonstrate the unique
contributions that the psychological safety construct makes in today’s dy-
namic workplace. Hence, fostering perceptions of psychological safety
appears to be an important consideration for organizations attempting to
maintain competitiveness. Indeed, the impact that psychological safety
has on the learning process is “at the very core of why the construct has
maintained the high level of research attention over the years” (Edmond-
son & Lei, 2014; p. 37) and why it likely will continue to be an important
construct in the 21st century organization.
    At the group level of analysis, we were limited in our ability to as-
sess the full nomological network because considerably fewer studies on
psychological safety have been conducted at this level. However, we were
able to examine a number of key relationships and found that the rela-
tionships with antecedents and outcomes were generally consistent with
individual-level findings. In sum, psychological safety is a robust con-
struct with a diverse nomological network. There are a myriad of factors
that may facilitate the emergence of psychological safety with some (e.g.,
work design and leadership) being relatively more important than others
(e.g., personality). Furthermore, it is an important construct given its re-
lationship with a variety of critical group-level work outcomes, providing
additional support for its validity at both levels of analysis.

Incremental Validity

     Though it may come to no surprise that psychological safety is re-
lated to central work outcomes, one may wonder whether this construct
possesses predictive power over and above the antecedents that lead to
its emergence. In every investigation, psychological safety captured sig-
nificant incremental variance in outcomes beyond the antecedent predic-
tors. Conversely, many antecedents failed to capture incremental variance
beyond psychological safety. Overall, our findings demonstrate the critical
role of this emergent construct as a facilitator of employee performance.
Interestingly, psychological safety accounted for more incremental vari-
ance explained in task performance than citizenship behaviors; the unique
attitudes, cognitions, and behaviors that derive from a psychologically
safe workforce seem to be more strongly related to in-role performance
than extra-role behaviors.

Methodological Moderators

    One concern with any primary study is the possibility that findings are
artifacts of study design characteristics. Meta-analyses are uniquely suited

142                    PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


to address these concerns by systematically comparing results across dif-
ferent research designs. In many cases where study design characteristics
could be explored as moderators, the significance of psychological safety
generalized regardless of the study design characteristics tested. However,
our analyses did demonstrate a number of areas of methodological con-
cern for psychological safety research that should be addressed in future
research.
    We first focus on two issues related to common method bias: same
source bias and temporal separation. As for the former, only 13% of the
correlations extracted for analyses were collected from different sources.
In fact, for several relationships, it was not possible to examine the pres-
ence of same source bias because of an absence of studies in which
variables were collected from multiple sources. In total, for the seven
relationships in which there was enough variance in study designs to
permit an assessment of this moderator condition, three contained statisti-
cally significant differences in effect sizes, with validity coefficients being
higher when both psychological safety and the criterion of interest were
collected from the same source.
    Temporal separation has been much more prevalent in the literature,
with 35% of the psychological safety correlations including constructs
measures at separate points in time. For the 12 total relationships where it
was possible to assess the impact of this research design characteristics,
only one was statistically significant; the relationship between psycho-
logical safety and job satisfaction was significantly lower when these
constructs were assessed at different points in time than when assessed
simultaneously.
    Taken together, we conclude that common method bias is a major
concern with past empirical research and we encourage researchers in this
literature to design studies that draw from different sources and introduce
temporal separation between these constructs. Overall, effect sizes were
27% higher when studies involved data collected within the same sources
and at the same times than when both different sources and temporal sep-
aration were employed. That being said, our meta-analysis revealed that
psychological safety relationships are not entirely spurious artifacts of
percept–percept inflation; when assessed at different times and from dif-
ferent sources, effect sizes were decreased, but still moderate in magnitude
and statistically significant.
    In addition, in some cases where same-source biases appeared—for
instance, concerning relationships between positive leadership relations
and psychological safety—relying on different sources to alleviate com-
mon method biases may have undesirable consequences. To the extent
that it is the perception of leadership that influences individual’s feelings
concerning psychological safety, it is possible to argue that drawing on

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                          143


different sources may deflate true validities (Frese & Zapf, 1988). There-
fore, we recommend that if data are best collected from the same source,
researchers should attempt to add temporal separation between the vari-
ables to minimize artificial inflations of effect sizes due to common method
bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, & Podsakoff, 2012).
    Our moderator analyses also uncovered evidence at the individual
level that the “file drawer effect” may be an issue in psychological safety
research. Our comparative analysis of published and unpublished stud-
ies demonstrated instances where relationships with psychological safety
were significantly higher across published studies for task performance
and citizenship behaviors (p < .05) and learning behavior (p < .10).
This is particularly concerning because these are the three most stud-
ied outcomes in the psychological safety literature. Though recent re-
search suggests that file drawer effects do not pose a major problem
(i.e., Dalton, Aguinis, Dalton, Bosco, & Pierce, 2012), our results indi-
cate that it may be premature to make broad statements on the issue,
at least as it pertains to research on psychological safety. Indeed, or-
ganizational scholars are often interested in the “bottom line” in their
research, and the lack of statistical findings for important outcome vari-
ables might hinder a study’s ability to be published. Our results seem
to partially support this notion for our sample. Though this issue tran-
scends any single research area, future research on psychological safety
should design research studies that are not wholly contingent upon the bot-
tom line and focus on research that is methodologically and theoretically
sound.
    The final issue that emerged as a result of our analysis was the signif-
icant difference between subjective and objective measures of task per-
formance. Although the psychological safety literature in general lacks
longitudinal designs and the incorporation of objective criteria, we found
that for task performance, the effect sizes were higher when measures of
performance were subjective in nature (e.g., supervisor rated; ρ̂ = .40)
as compared to objective in nature (e.g., course performance; ρ̂ = .07).
Indeed, past research has noted that these two ratings are only moder-
ately correlated (Bommer et al., 1995). Our concern regarding this issue
is further exacerbated because effect sizes were lower when task perfor-
mance was rated by someone other than the person providing the psy-
chological safety perceptions (i.e., source). We urge future researchers to
examine the extent to which psychological safety impacts more objective
measures of task performance and to continue to gather ratings of perfor-
mance from other sources when subjective measures are the most viable
outcome.

144                    PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


Uncertainty Avoidance as a Moderator

    Our study takes a first step toward understanding the role of national
context in psychological safety validities. With regard to antecedents,
we found that positive personality traits, work design characteristics, and
supportive work context all had significantly stronger effects on psycho-
logical safety in high UA cultures. Somewhat surprisingly, the effects of
positive leadership relations were weaker in high UA cultures. Recall that
high UA cultures value stability and the establishment of formal rules
(Hofstede, 2001), and thus, it may require that the signals come from a
broader range of sources in order to feel higher psychological safety in
these cultures. Thus, employees in high UA cultures may demonstrate a
higher sensitivity to elements of personality, work design, and supportive
work context than to leader behaviors. Research has shown that leaders
in high UA cultures tend to be more controlling and less approachable
(Offermann & Hellmann, 1997), thus putting a larger emphasis on the
other antecedents to shape psychological safety perceptions.
    With regard to outcomes, our results demonstrate that high UA may
make psychological safety even more important in affecting work out-
comes. As employees in high UA cultures are less inclined to take risks
at work, they are more likely to fully invest themselves into their work
and perform at a higher level when they perceive such expressions of self
are encouraged within the work context. Hence, it seems like fostering
psychological safety—a construct developed in countries with low UA
norms—may be even more critical in cultures where risk taking and di-
vergence from status quo is not the norm. All in all, our results provide
initial evidence that the role of psychological safety may be impacted by
culture and encourage future research to more fully explore this issue.

Homology Across Levels of Analysis

    To date, the majority of research, at both the group and individual level
of analysis, has drawn from the same theoretical roots (i.e., Edmondson,
1999; Kahn, 1990; Schein & Bennis, 1965). By using group-level empiri-
cal and theoretical evidence to support individual-level propositions, there
is an implied assumption of homology across levels. If this assumption
is unfounded, both researchers and practitioners should be careful not to
expect inferences drawn from one level of analysis to generalize to other
levels or for cross-level relationships to exist (where, for instance, group
perceptions of psychological safety influence individual outcomes).
    Chen et al. (2005) identify three different theories of homology. Iden-
tical theories of homology predict that relationships within a construct’s
nomological network will be identical in magnitude and direction across

                        M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                             145


levels of analysis. Proportional theories of homology predict that the rela-
tive pattern of relationships will hold across levels though magnitudes may
differ. Finally, metaphoric theories require only that the pattern of signif-
icant findings hold true across levels. The evidence from our analyses is
most consistent with an identical theory of homology. In other words, the
assumption of homology that has permeated the literature is supported by
our empirical analysis. Though magnitudes somewhat differed, the results
of our regression analysis to assess homology showed that there was no
statistically significant difference in effects sizes across levels of analysis.
As additional support for these results, the Spearman rank-order correla-
tion between the distribution of ratings across the individual and group
levels was high (rs = .86). This finding is important because it provides
empirical validation for previous assumptions concerning the multilevel
composition of psychological safety and the generalizability of cross-level
theories (Chen et al., 2005; Edmondson & Lei, 2014).

Implications for Future Psychological Safety Research

    A primary contribution of this research is not only to synthesize empir-
ical work on psychological safety but also to identify the pressing issues
that should be addressed as the literature continues to mature. In this sec-
tion, we present what we consider to be the most pressing areas of research
that can potentially move the literature forward.
    Our meta-analysis has uncovered the impressive and rather extensive
nomological network surrounding psychological safety. It is clear that
several antecedents are related to the emergence of psychological safety
perceptions and that these perceptions are significantly associated with a
variety of workplace outcomes. Although our meta-analysis contributes
to the understanding of the relative importance of different antecedents,
what is less clear is whether certain antecedents are necessary and/or
sufficient for the development of psychological safety. Or, for that mat-
ter, whether psychological safety is necessary and/or sufficient for the
development of behavioral and attitudinal work outcomes. Moreover, in
what ways might different antecedent conditions substitute or neutralize
the effectiveness of other conditions? Here, we suggest future theoretical
development exploring issues of necessity and sufficiency and encourage
researchers to explore alternative nonparametric methodologies—such as
qualitative comparative analysis (Ragin, 2000) or necessary condition
analysis (Dul, 2016)—which are better suited to address these issues than
standard regression approaches.
    Another critical question left unaddressed thus far in the psychologi-
cal safety literature is, “can psychological safety lead to negative conse-
quences?” As with many constructs in the organizational sciences, there

146                   PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


may be a “dark side” that accompanies the positives (Griffin & O’Leary-
Kelly, 2004). As an example, organizational citizenship behaviors have
long been considered a positive behavior that aids in organizational func-
tioning (Organ, 1988), yet recent research has demonstrated that there
may be costs associated with such behaviors (Bolino, Hsiung, Harvey, &
LePine, 2015; Bolino, Turnley, & Niehoff, 2004). Similarly, there may be
situations in which psychological safety can lead to negative outcomes.
Pearsall and Ellis (2011) found that high psychological safety, whereby
perceptions of interpersonal risk are low, created a context in which teams
high in utilitarianism were more likely to engage in cheating behavior. Fu-
ture research should further explore such possibilities to develop a deeper
understanding of how and when psychological safety might contribute to
less than positive outcomes.
    Although we provide initial evidence that culture matters to psycho-
logical safety, research that explores psychological safety across a variety
of cultures and cultural dimensions is warranted, especially given that
the majority of research on psychological safety has been conducted in
English-speaking, Western countries. Additionally, research can go be-
yond national culture to shed light on the role of context in psychological
safety’s nomological network. For instance, norms and workplace prac-
tices differ by industry (Chatman, & Jehn, 1994) and can therefore alter
the extent to which different antecedents matter to psychological safety.
Similarly, in some industries, particularly those where membership in ex-
ternal professional associations is important (Wimbush & Shepard, 1994),
employees may form psychological safety perceptions at least partially
based on factors related to the “way of doing things” within their pro-
fession (Nembhard & Edmondson, 2006). Finally, formal institutions or
“rules of the game” also warrant attention. For instance, countries with
fragile or corrupt states and ineffective judicial systems often create a
climate of cynicism in addition to providing poor protection to the work-
force (e.g., Pelletier & Bligh, 2006; Theobald, 1990). Hence, weak in-
stitutional environments may counter benefits otherwise resulting from
psychological safety as well as reduce the effectiveness of psychological
safety antecedents. Alternatively, weak institutional environments may
make some antecedents, such as immediate leaders, even more important.
These issues have not been examined to date, and comparative studies
are crucial for the field to advance a contextualized understanding of
psychological safety.
    Further, few studies have examined how psychological safety may
evolve over time. One exception, Liang et al. (2012) reported that psycho-
logical safety perceptions collected just 6 weeks apart were only moder-
ately correlated (r = .27), which indicates that psychological safety may
fluctuate over time within individuals. The exploration of the workplace

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                            147


dynamics and events that influence these changes offers a ripe oppor-
tunity for psychological safety researchers. Techniques such as experi-
ence sampling methodology (ESM) or ecological momentary assessment
(EMA) have gained considerable traction in organizational research (Beal
& Weiss, 2003; Fisher & To, 2012) and thus might be appropriate for the
field to explore the drivers of psychological safety dynamics.
    Psychological safety is inherently an interpersonal construct built
through workplace interactions (Edmondson, 2002), which means that
it can be breached or violated. Hence, damages to psychological safety
would necessitate repair to continue to reap the benefits. If a transgression
occurs that damages psychological safety, what is the process by which
psychological safety might be rebuilt? For instance, considerable research
has been conducted on trust repair (e.g., Kim, Cooper, Dirks, & Ferrin,
2013; Tomlinson & Mayer, 2009), and the theoretical link between trust
and psychological safety would suggest that the literature on trust re-
pair may be relevant to understanding psychological safety repair. To our
knowledge, no studies have examined this issue, and we feel that research
on this aspect of psychological safety would create a deeper understanding
of psychological safety development.
    As for the role of leadership, the results of our study across both
levels of analysis clearly indicate that as leaders develop positive relation-
ships with followers, higher perceptions of psychological safety are likely
to occur. Additionally, the effect sizes across the different conceptualiza-
tions of leadership were strikingly similar. Leadership matters in fostering
psychological safety, so we strongly encourage researchers to move be-
yond studying main effects to developing a deeper understanding of when
and where leadership matters. The boundary conditions of psychological
safety remain an understudied area (Edmondson & Lei, 2014), with this
being particularly the case when it comes to the role of leadership. Fur-
ther, from a methodological perspective, research on psychological safety
and leadership would benefit from examining leadership’s impact from
multiple perspectives. Braddy, Gooty, Fleenor, and Yammarino (2014)
recently found that agreement on leader behavior between self-reports
and follower reports is moderate, at best. We are not suggesting that the
impact that leaders have on psychological safety has been overstated in
the literature, but to the extent that research can examine leadership from
multiple perspectives, it will contribute to a more complete picture of this
relationship.
    Another potentially fruitful avenue that emerges from our findings is
the exploration of the nature of the relationship between engagement and
psychological safety. Theoretically, most research has cast psychological
safety as an antecedent to work engagement, with psychological safety
enabling employees to invest themselves into their work (e.g., Edmondson

148                      PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


& Lei, 2014; Kahn, 1990; May et al., 2004). However, other conceptual
work has indicated a possible reciprocal relationship between psycho-
logical safety and engagement with both having the ability to influence
the other positively (i.e., Saks, 2006). Indeed, research on psychological
safety (e.g., Edmondson, 1999) and engagement (Christian et al., 2011;
Rich et al., 2010) often utilizes an input-process-output framework in
which psychological safety or engagement independently serve as medi-
ating states between antecedents and outcomes. Our incremental validity
analysis found that both engagement and psychological safety predicted
similar levels of incremental variance in task performance and citizen-
ship behaviors when the other is added to the analysis first. This provides
some evidence that psychological safety and engagement may work to-
gether to impact important work outcomes. Research that empirically
examines this relationship in more depth would be beneficial for both
literatures.
    Finally, we were unable to assess a number of relationships at the group
level of analysis because of the comparatively smaller number of group
level studies. This is somewhat surprising given that Edmondson’s (1999)
original work, which provides the scale that is most often utilized, was
designed at the group level. In fact, Edmondson and Lei (2014) recently
noted that psychological safety is a “phenomenon that lives at the group
level” (p. 37). Hence, the literature would benefit from more group-level
and cross-level research on psychological safety.

Practical Implications

    Whether it is performance gains, increased learning, engagement, in-
formation sharing, or improved satisfaction and commitment, we demon-
strate that psychological safety impacts important organizational out-
comes. Our results show that there are personality traits that are positively
related to psychological safety. Hence, organizations may find value in se-
lecting applicants that are predisposed to either create or perceive a work
environment safe for personal risk taking. In particular, organizations can
benefit from investing in employees that are proactive, as they are more
likely to feel psychologically safe and engaged in their work. Human re-
source managers and those responsible for designing selection tools may
find value in including measures that capture these personality traits. Given
the concern that self-report personality measures may be vulnerable to
faking (White, Young, Hunter, & Rumsey, 2008), additional mechanisms
throughout the interview process should be implemented to capture these
specific personality traits. Though structured interviews often include per-
sonality elements, namely, the Big Five (Levashina, Hartwell, Morgeson,
& Campion, 2014), our results indicate that organizations interested in

                       M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                            149


fostering psychological safety should focus on designing interview ques-
tions that capture proactive personality and learning orientation as well.
    A recent survey of employees across the world revealed that only
47% characterized their workplace as “a psychologically safe and healthy
environment to work in” (Ipsos, 2012). In light of the results presented
here, more organizations should be paying attention to this issue. Indeed,
the results of the incremental validity analyses indicate that psychological
safety should not be treated as a byproduct of high impact work pro-
cesses but rather as a goal with unique importance. Our results indicate
that psychological safety is impacted by positive leader relations, work-
place support, and work design. Training sessions for those interested
in leadership positions might emphasize the importance of ensuring that
subordinates feel safe to challenge the status quo. Though “open door”
policies are often touted in the workplace, leaders can be trained in ways
to actively pursue being challenged. Relatedly, to the extent that leaders
communicate clear expectations and goals, this is more likely to lead to
perceived safety as employees have a better understanding of what they
should be doing.
    In addition, training efforts for all employees can focus on teamwork
and developing effective relationships as social support was shown to have
a positive influence on safety perceptions. From a job design perspective,
interdependence was found to have a strong effect on psychological safety.
Designing work that requires more interdependence may not be relevant
for all work settings, but to the extent that employees must rely on each
other to get their jobs done, psychological safety is more likely to develop.
With that said, we provide initial evidence that psychological safety effect
sizes may vary across cultures. Therefore, organizations may have to
adjust their efforts to foster psychological safety depending on the culture
in which they are operating. For instance, investing in the facilitation
of psychological safety may be even more critical where risk taking is
not the norm, particularly for managers whose behavior is likely to be
shaped by the same cultural norms of the followers. On the other hand,
expatriates working in a culture other than their own should be trained on
the underlying assumptions of the culture in which they are working to
not only understand how followers are likely to react but also to overcome
the biases that are likely to result from their own culture.

Limitations and Future Research

    This research effort is not without limitations. First, in many cases, the
relatively smaller sample sizes prevented us from more rigorous analyti-
cal examinations. Thus, our study highlights areas where research has the
potential to fill in existing gaps in the literature. For example, very few

150                   PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


studies have examined how group-level psychological safety is affected
by group personality. As research into the development of team-level per-
sonality accumulates (LePine, Buckman, Crawford, & Methot, 2011), we
hope researchers engage in such studies. On a related note, the lack of
research conducted at the group level limited our ability to examine the
incremental validity issue at the group level. As group-level meta-analyses
begin to accumulate, this issue could be explored in future research
efforts.
    Second, in categorizing previous research, we aimed for operational-
izing constructs at a level of breadth that would balance the need to have
high accumulations of primary studies with the need to keep the construct
categories theoretically meaningful. Though we do present narrower cat-
egories as sample size allowed, we also report the broader categories
for moderator testing due to sample size restrictions. A significant ad-
vantage to our approach is that it allows for cross-study comparisons.
For instance, broad leadership categories consistent with our operational-
ization have been examined meta-analytically (i.e., Heavey, Holwerda,
& Hausknecht, 2013; Nahrgang, Morgeson, & Hofmann, 2011; Seibert
et al., 2011). In addition, broad “work design” categories have been con-
ceptualized similarly in meta-analyses by Hong et al. (2013) and Seibert
et al. (2011).
    Third, though we drew from theory to classify constructs as an-
tecedents and outcomes, the majority of our studies were cross sectional
in nature, so we are not able to make strong assertions of causality. We
encourage future research to examine these models utilizing longitudinal
or experimental designs to assess causality.
    Fourth, though our analyses indicate that psychological safety percep-
tions demonstrate homology from the individual to the group level, we
were not able to assess the relative impact of individual and group per-
ceptions of psychological safety on important work outcomes. Research
has demonstrated support for the ability of employees to form coexisting
perceptions of the same phenomenon at two levels of analysis (Naumann
& Bennett, 2000; Zohar & Luria, 2005). We therefore encourage future
research that examines the incremental impact of psychological safety
climate beyond individual perceptions.

                               Conclusion

    The results of this study demonstrate that psychological safety is an
important construct at both the individual and group level of analysis.
By taking stock of what has been done, and exploring several important
questions, this study moves the research stream forward and brings to
light gaps to be filled in future research. We hope that our study will

                            M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                      151


encourage researchers to pursue these and other investigations into the
role of psychological safety in the workplace.

                                     REFERENCES

References marked with an asterisk* indicate studies included in the meta-analysis.

Amabile TM. (1998). How to kill creativity. Harvard Business Review, 76, 76–87.
*Arumugam V, Antony J, Kumar M. (2013). Linking learning and knowledge creation
      to project success in six sigma projects: An empirical investigation. Inter-
      national Journal of Production Economics, 141, 388–402. http://dx.doi.org/10.
      1016/j.ijpe.2012.09.003
*Aryee S, Mondejar R, Chu CWL. (2012, August). An empirical investigation of pro-
      cesses linking core self-evaluations and performance. Paper presented at the Annual
      Conference of Academy of Management, Boston, MA.
*Ashauer SA, Macan T. (2013). How can leaders foster team learning? Effects of leader-
      assigned mastery and performance goals and psychological safety. The Journal of
      Psychology, 147, 541–561. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223980.2012.719940
Baer M, Frese M. (2003). Innovation is not enough: Climates for initiative and psycholog-
      ical safety, process innovations, and firm performance. Journal of Organizational
      Behavior, 24, 45–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/job.179
Bateman TS, Crant JM. (1993). The proactive component of organizational behavior:
      A measure and correlates. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14, 103–118.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/job.4030140202
Beal DJ, Weiss HM. (2003). Methods of ecological momentary assessment in or-
      ganizational research. Organizational Research Methods, 6, 440–464. doi:
      10.1177/1094428103257361
*Beatty EJ. (2004). Chronic illness as invisible diversity: Disclosing and coping with illness
      in the workplace. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Boston College.
Blau PM. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley.
Bolino MC, Hsiung H, Harvey J, LePine JA. (2015). “Well, I’m tired of tryin’!” Organiza-
      tional citizenship behavior and citizenship fatigue. Journal of Applied Psychology,
      100, 56–74. doi: 10.1037/a0037583
Bolino MC, Turnley WH, Niehoff BP. (2004). The other side of the story: Re-examining
      prevailing assumptions about organizational citizenship behavior. Human Resource
      Management Review, 14, 229–246. doi: 10.1016/j.hrmr.2004.05.004
Bommer WH, Johnson JL, Rich GA, Podsakoff PM, MacKenzie SB. (1995).
      On the interchangeability of objective and subjective measures of employee
      performance: A meta-analysis. P ERSONNEL P SYCHOLOGY, 1995, 587–605.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1995.tb01772.x
*Boon A, Raes E, Kyndt E, Dochy F. (2013). Team learning beliefs and behaviours in
      response teams. European Journal of Training and Development, 37, 357–379.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/03090591311319771
Borenstein M, Hedges L, Higgins J, Rothstein H. (2010). A basic introduction to fixed-
      effect and random-effect models for meta-analysis. Research Synthesis Methods, 1,
      97–111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.12
Braddy PW, Gooty J, Fleenor JW, Yammarino FJ. (2014). Leader behaviors and
      career derailment potential: A multi-analytic methods examination of rat-
      ing source and self-other agreement. Leadership Quarterly, 25, 373–390.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2013.10.001

152                        PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


*Bradley BH, Postlethwaite BE, Klotz AC, Hamdani MR, Brown KG. (2012). Reap-
       ing the benefits of task conflict in teams: The critical role of team psycholog-
       ical safety climate. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 151–158. http://dx.doi.
       org/10.1037/a0024200
*Bresman H, Zellmer-Bruhn M. (2013). The structural context of team learning: Effects
       of organizational and team structure on internal and external learning. Organization
       Science, 24, 1120–1139. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1120.0783
*Brinsfield TC. (2013). Employee silence motives: Investigation of dimensionality and
       development of measures. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 34, 671–697.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/job.1829
*Brueller D, Carmeli A. (2011). Linking capacities of high-quality relationships to team
       learning and performance in service organizations. Human Resource Management,
       50, 455–477. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hrm.20435
*Bstieler L, Hemmert M. (2010). Increasing learning and time efficiency in interorganiza-
       tional new product development teams. Journal of Product Innovation Management,
       27, 485–499. 10.1111/j.1540-5885.2010.00731.x
*Bunderson JS, Boumgarden P. (2010). Structure and learning in self-managed teams:
       Why "bureaucratic" teams can be better learners. Organization Science, 21, 609–
       624. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1090.0483
*Carmeli A, Brueller D, Dutton JE. (2009). Learning behaviours in the workplace: The
       role of high-quality interpersonal relationships and psychological safety. Systems
       Research and Behavioral Science, 26, 81–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sres.932
*Carmeli A, Gittell JH. (2009). High-quality relationships, psychological safety, and learn-
       ing from failures in work organizations. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30,
       709–729. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/job.565
*Carmeli A, Reiter-Palmon R, Ziv E. (2010). Inclusive leadership and employee
       involvement in creative tasks in the workplace: The mediating role of psy-
       chological safety. Creativity Research Journal, 22, 250–260. http://dx.doi.
       org/10.1080/10400419.2010.504654
*Carmeli A, Zisu M. (2009). The relational underpinnings of quality internal auditing
       in medical clinics in Israel. Social Science & Medicine, 68, 894–902.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2008.12.031
*Carroll ST. (2008). The role of sanctification of work, religiosity, and spirituality as
       predictors of work-related outcomes for individuals working at religiously affiliated
       institutions. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Loyola College in Maryland.
Chambless DL, Hollon SD. (1998). Defining empirically supported therapies. Journal
       of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 7–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-
       006X.66.1.7
Chan D. (1998). Functional relations among constructs in the same content domain at
       different levels of analysis: A typology of composition models. Journal of Applied
       Psychology, 83, 234–246. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.83.2.234
Chan D. (2006). Interactive effects of situational judgment effectiveness and proactive
       personality on work perceptions and work outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology,
       91, 475–481. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.91.2.475
*Chandrasekaran A, Mishra A. (2012). Task design, team context, and psychological safety:
       An empirical analysis of R&D projects in high technology organizations. Produc-
       tion and Operations Management, 21, 977–996. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1937-
       5956.2012.01329.x
Chatman JA, Jehn KA. (1994). Assessing the relationship between industry characteristics
       and organizational culture: How different can you be? Academy of Management
       Journal, 37, 522–553. doi: 10.2307/256699

                            M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                     153


Chen G, Bliese PD, Mathieu JE. (2005). Conceptual framework and statistical procedures
       for delineating and testing multilevel theories of homology. Organizational Research
       Methods, 8, 375–409. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1094428105280056
Chiaburu DS, Harrison DA. (2008). Do peers make the place? Conceptual synthesis and
       meta-analysis of coworker effects on perceptions, attitudes, OCBs, and performance.
       Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 1082–1103. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.93.5.1082
*Chiaburu DS, Li N, Zheng X. (2011). Coworker influences on citizenship and taking
       charge: Team-level processes and contingencies. Unpublished manuscript.
*Chiu WCK, Leung H, Kong K, Lee C. (2011, April). Learning goal orientation and cre-
       ativity: Role of psychological safety. Paper presented at the 26th Annual Conference
       of the Society for Industrial & Organizational Psychology, Chicago, IL.
*Choo AS. (2011). Impact of a stretch strategy on knowledge creation in quality im-
       provement projects. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 58, 87–96.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2010.2048913
Christian MS, Bradley JC, Wallace JC, Burke MJ. (2009). Workplace safety: A meta-
       analysis of the roles of person and situation factors. Journal of Applied Psychology,
       94, 1103–1127. http://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/a0016172
Christian MS, Garza AS, Slaughter JE. (2011). Work engagement: A quantitative review
       and test of its relations with task and contextual performance. P ERSONNEL P SY-
       CHOLOGY , 64, 89–136. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2010.01203.x
*Chughtai A, Buckley F. (2013). Exploring the impact of trust on research scientists’
       work engagement. Personnel Review, 42, 396–421. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/PR-
       06-2011-0097
Colquitt JA, Scott BA, LePine JA. (2007). Trust, trustworthiness, and trust propensity: A
       meta-analytic test of their unique relationships with risk taking and job performance.
       Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 909–927. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-
       9010.92.4.909
*Coombe DD. (2010). Secure base leadership: A positive theory of leadership incorporat-
       ing safety, exploration and positive action. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Case
       Western Reserve University.
Costa PT, McCrae RR. (1992). Revised NEO personality inventory. Odessa, FL: Psycho-
       logical Assessment Resources.
Crampton SM, Wagner III JA. (1994). Percept-percept inflation in microroganizational
       research: An investigation of prevalence and effect. Journal of Applied Psychology,
       79, 67–76. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.79.1.67
Crant JM. (2000). Proactive behavior in organizations. Journal of Management Studies, 26,
       435–462. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/014920630002600304
Cropanzano R, Mitchell MS. (2005). Social exchange theory: An interdisci-
       plinary review. Journal of Management, 31, 874–900. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
       0149206305279602
Dalton DR, Aguinis H, Dalton CM, Bosco FA, Pierce CA. (2012). Revisiting
       the file drawer problem in meta-analysis: An assessment of published and
       nonpublished correlation matrices. P ERSONNEL P SYCHOLOGY, 65, 221–249.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.2012.01243.x
*De Clercq D, Rius IB. (2007). Organizational commitment in Mexican small and medium-
       sized firms: The role of work status, organizational climate, and entrepreneurial ori-
       entation. Journal of Small Business Management, 45, 467–490. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-
       627X.2007.00223.x
De Dreu CKW, Weingart LR. (2003). Task versus relationship conflict, team performance,
       and team member satisfaction: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88,
       741–749. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.88.4.741

154                        PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


*De Hoogh AHBd, Greer JJ, Hartog DNd. (2011). Diabolical dictators or capable comman-
        ders? Autocratic leaders, power struggles, and team performance. Paper presented
        at the Annual Conference of Academy of Management, San Antonio, TX.
*Detert JR, Burris ER. (2007). Leadership behavior and employee voice: Is the door
        really open? Academy of Management Journal, 50, 869–884. http://dx.doi.org/
        10.5465/AMJ.2007.26279183
*Dowley A. (2006). Learning behaviors and psychological safety in nonprofit organiza-
        tion boards of directors: An exploratory study. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation),
        Alliant International University.
Dudley NM, Orvis KA, Lebiecki JE, Cortina JM. (2006). A meta-analytic investigation of
        conscientiousness in the prediction of job performance: Examining the intercorrela-
        tions and the incremental validity of narrow traits. Journal of Applied Psychology,
        91, 40–57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.91.1.40
*Dufresne RL. (2007). Learning from critical incidents by ad hoc teams: The impacts of
        team debriefing leader behaviors and psychological safety. (Unpublished doctoral
        dissertation), Boston College.
Dul J. (2016). Necessary condition analysis (NCA): Logic and methodology of “necessary
        but not sufficient” causality. Organizational Research Methods, 19, 10–52. doi:
        10.1177/1094428115584005
Dulebohn JH, Bommer WH, Liden RC, Brouer RL, Ferris GR. (2012). A meta-anlaysis of
        antecedents and consequences of leader-member exchange: Integrating the past
        with an eye toward the future. Journal of Management, 38, 1715–1759. doi:
        10.1177/0149206311415280
Dweck CS. (1986). Motivational processes affecting learning. American Psychologist, 41,
        1040–1048. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.41.10.1040
*Edmondson A. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams. Admin-
        istrative Science Quarterly, 44, 350–383. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2666999
Edmondson AC. (2002). The local and variegated nature of learning in or-
        ganizations: A group-level perspective. Organization Science, 13, 128–146.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/orsc.13.2.128.530
Edmondson AC. (2003a). Managing the risk of learning: Psychological safety in work
        teams. In M West (Ed.), International handbook of organizational teamwork. Lon-
        don, UK: Blackwell Publishing.
Edmondson AC. (2003b). Speaking up in the operating room: How team leaders promote
        learning in interdisciplinary action teams. Journal of Management Studies, 40, 1419–
        1452. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-6486.00386
Edmondson AC. (2004). Psychological safety, trust, and learning in organizations: A
        group-level lens. In RM Kramer & KS Cook (Eds.), Trust and distrust in orga-
        nizations: Dilemmas and approaches (239–272). New York, NY: Russell Sage
        Foundation.
Edmondson AC, Bohmer RM, Pisano GP. (2001). Disrupted routines: Team learning and
        new technology implementation in hospitals. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46,
        685–716. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3094828
Edmondson AC, Lei Z. (2014). Psychological safety: The history, renaissance, and future of
        an interpersonal construct. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Orga-
        nizational Behavior, 1, 23–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-031413-
        091305
*Edmondson AC, Mogelof JP. (2005). Explaining psychological safety in innovation teams:
        Organizational culture, team dynamics, or personality? In LL Thompson & C Choi
        (Eds.), Creativity and innovation in organizational teams (pp. 109–136). Mahwah,
        NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

                            M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                     155


Eisenberger R, Huntington R, Hutchison S, Sowa D. (1986). Perceived organizational sup-
       port. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 500–507. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-
       9010.71.3.500
*Ellwart T, Bündgens S, Rack O. (2013). Managing knowledge exchange and identi-
       fication in age diverse teams. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 28, 950–972.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/JMP-06-2013-0181
*Erden Z, Von Krogh G, Kim S. (2012). Knowledge sharing in an online community of
       volunteers: The role of community munificence. European Management Review, 9,
       213–227. doi: 10.1111/j.1740-4762.2012.01039.x
*Faraj S, Yan AM. (2009). Boundary work in knowledge teams. Journal of Applied Psy-
       chology, 94, 604–617. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0014367
Fisher CD, To ML. (2012). Using experience sampling methodology in organizational
       behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 33, 865–877. doi: 10.1002/job.1803
*Foo SC. (2008). Walking mood inductors: Group and individual influences on affective
       linkages within teams. (Unpublished master’s thesis for master’s degree), Pennsyl-
       vania State University.
Frazier ML, Bowler WM. (2015). Voice climate, supervisor undermining, and work
       outcomes: A group-level examination. Journal of Management, 41, 841–863.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206311434533
Frazier ML, Fainshmidt S. (2012). Voice climate, work outcomes, and the mediating role of
       psychological empowerment: A multi-level examination. Group and Organization
       Management, 37, 691–715. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1059601112463960
Frese M, Zapf D. (1988). Methodological issues in the study of work and stress: Objective
       vs. subjective measurement of stress at work and the question of longitudinal studies.
       In CL Cooper & R Payne (Eds.), Causes, coping, and consequences of stress at work
       (pp. 375–411). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Fuller JB, Marler LE. (2009). Change driven by nature: A meta-analytic review of the
       proactive personality literature. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 75, 329–345.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2009.05.008
Geyskens I, Krishnan R, Steenkamp J-BEM, Cunha PV. (2009). A review and evaluation
       of meta-analysis practices in management research. Journal of Management, 35,
       393–419. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206308328501
*Ghitulescu BE. (2007). Shaping tasks and relationships at work: Examining the an-
       tecedents and consequences of employee job crafting. (Unpublished doctoral dis-
       sertation), University of Pittsburgh.
*Ghosh R, Shuck B, Petrosko J. (2012). Emotional intelligence and organizational learn-
       ing in work teams. The Journal of Management Development, 31, 603–619.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/02621711211230894
*Gibson CB, Gibbs JL. (2006). Unpacking the concept of virtuality: The effects of
       geographic dispersion, electronic dependence, dynamic structure, and national
       diversity on team innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 51, 451–495. doi:
       10.2189/asqu.51.3.451
*Gissel JL. (2010). Impact of psychological safety and professional skepticism on private
       information sharing during SAS 99 brainstorming. (Unpublished doctoral disserta-
       tion), University of Wisconsin–Madison.
*Gockel C. (2007). Effects of put-down humor on cohesion in groups. (Unpublished doctoral
       dissertation), Michigan State University.
*Gong Y, Cheung SY, Wang M, Huang JC. (2012). Unfolding the proactive process
       for creativity: Integration of the employee proactivity, information exchange,
       and psychological safety perspectives. Journal of Management, 38, 1611–1633.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0149206310380250

156                        PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


Gouldner AW. (1960). The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American Soci-
       ological Review, 25, 161–178. doi: 10.2307/2092623
Graen GB, Uhl-Bien M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership: Develop-
       ment of leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years: Ap-
       plying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 6, 219–247.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/1048-9843(95)90036-5
Grant AM, Ashford SJ. (2008). The dynamics of proactivity at work. Research in Organi-
       zational Behavior, 28, 3–34. doi: 10.1016/j.riob.2008.04.002
*Greenbaum RL, Hill A, Eissa G. (2011, August). Machiavellianism to unethical behavior:
       An examination of moderators. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the
       Academy of Management, San Antonio, TX.
Greenberg J. (1987). The college sophomore as guinea pig: Setting the record
       straight. Academy of Management Review, 12, 157–159. http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/
       AMR.1987.4306516
Griffin RW, O’Leary-Kelly AM. (2004). The dark side of organizational behavior. San
       Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
*Gu Q, Wang GG, Wang L. (2013). Social capital and innovation in R&D teams: The medi-
       ating roles of psychological safety and learning from mistakes. R & D Management,
       43, 89–102. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/radm.12002
Hackman JR, Oldham GR. (1976). Motivation through the design of work: Test
       of a theory. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16, 250–279.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0030-5073(76)90016-7
*Halbesleben JRB, Rathert C. (2008). The role of continuous quality improvement and
       psychological safety in predicting work-arounds. Health Care Management Review,
       33, 134–144. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.HMR.0000304505.04932.62
Heavey AL, Holwerda JA, Hausknecht JP. (2013). Causes and consequences of collective
       turnover: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 412–433.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0032380
*Hetzner S, Gartmeier M, Heid H, Gruber H. (2011). Error orientation and reflection at
       work. Vocations and Learning, 4, 25–39. doi: 10.1007/s12186-010-9047-0
*Hirak R, Peng AC, Carmeli A, Schaubroeck JM. (2012). Linking leader inclusive-
       ness to work unit performance: The importance of psychological safety and
       learning from failures. Leadership Quarterly, 23, 107–117. http://dx.doi.org/10.
       1016/j.leaqua.2011.11.009
Hochwarter WA, Witt L, Treadway DC, Ferris GR. (2006). The interaction of social skill
       and organizational support on job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91,
       482–489. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.91.2.482
Hofstede G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related
       values. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Hofstede G. (2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions
       and organizations across nations (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Hong Y, Liao H, Hu J, Jiang K. (2013). Missing link in the service profit chain: A meta-
       analytic review of the antecedents, consequences, and moderators of service climate.
       Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 237–267. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0031666
*Huang C, Jiang P. (2012). Exploring the psychological safety of R&D teams: An em-
       pirical analysis in Taiwan. Journal of Management & Organization, 18, 175–192.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1833367200000948
Hubbard R, Armstrong JS. (1997). Publication bias against null results. Psychological
       Reports, 80, 337–338. doi: 10.2466/pr0.1997.80.1.337

                            M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                    157


Hülsheger UR, Anderson N, Salgado JF. (2009). Team-level predictors of innovation at
        work: A comprehensive meta-analysis spanning three decades of research. Journal
        of Applied Psychology, 94, 1128–1145. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015978
Humphrey SE, Nahrgang JD, Morgeson FP. (2007). Integrating motivational, social,
        and work design features: A meta-analytic summary and theoretical extension
        of the work design literature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1332–1356.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.92.5.1332
Hunter JE, Schmidt FL. (2004). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in
        research findings. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
*Hutt GK. (2007). Experiential learning spaces: Hermetic transformational leadership
        for psychological safety, consciousness development and math anxiety related infe-
        riority complex depotentiation. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Case Western
        Reserve University.
Ilgen DR, Hollenbeck JR. (1991). The structure of work: Job design and roles. In MD Dun-
        nette & LM Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology
        (Vol. 2, 2nd ed., pp. 165–207). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Ipsos. (2012). Mental well-being in the workplace, from http://www.ipsos-na.com
*Jefferson Jr T. (2009). Assessing the impact of media richness and leadership behaviors
        on team-based outcomes. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Pennsylvania State
        University.
Jehn KA. (1994). Enhancing effectiveness: An investigation of advantages and disadvan-
        tages of value-based intragroup conflict. International Journal of Conflict Manage-
        ment, 5, 223–238. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/eb022744
Jehn KA. (1995). A multimethod examination of the benefits and detriments
        of intragroup conflict. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40, 256–282.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2393638
*Johnson SL. (2008). Impact of leadership on continued participation in online groups.
        (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), University of Maryland.
Judge TA, Bono JE, Locke EA. (2000). Personality and job satisfaction: The medi-
        ating role of job characteristics. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 237–249.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.85.2.237
Judge TA, Rodell JB, Klinger RL, Simon LS, Crawford ER. (2013). Hierarchical repre-
        sentations of the five-factor model of personality in predicting job performance:
        Integrating three organizing frameworks with two theoretical perspectives. Journal
        of Applied Psychology, 98, 875–925. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0033901
Kahn WA. (1990). Psychological conditions of personal engagement and dis-
        engagement at work. Academy of Management Journal, 33, 692–724.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/256287
Kahn WA. (1992). To be fully there: Psychological presence at work. Human Relations,
        45, 321–349. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/001872679204500402
Kanfer R. (1990). Motivation theory and industrial/organizational psychology. In MD
        Dunnette & LM Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psy-
        chology (2nd ed., Vol. 1, pp. 75–170). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists
        Press.
*Kark R, Carmeli A. (2009). Alive and creating: The mediating role of vitality and aliveness
        in the relationship between psychological safety and creative work involvement.
        Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 785–804. doi: 10.1002/job.571
*Kayes DC. (2001). Experiential learning in teams: A study in learning style, group process
        and integrative complexity in ad hoc groups. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation),
        Case Western Reserve University.

158                         PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


*Kayes DC. (2006). From climbing stairs to riding waves: Group critical thinking
       and its development. Small Group Research, 37, 612–630. http://dx.doi.org/10.
       1177/1046496406294321
Kepes S, McDaniel MA, Brannick MT, Banks GC. (2013). Meta-analytic reviews in the
       organizational sciences: Two meta-analytic schools on the way to MARS (the meta-
       analytic reporting standards. Journal of Business and Psychology, 28, 123–143.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10869-013-9300-2
*Kessel M, Kratzer J, Schultz C. (2012). Psychological safety, knowledge sharing, and
       creative performance in healthcare teams. Creativity and Innovation Management,
       21, 147–157. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8691.2012.00635.x
Kim PH, Cooper CD, Dirks KT, Ferrin DL. (2013). Repairing trust with individuals
       vs. groups. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 120, 1–14.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2012.08.004
*Kirkman BL, Mathieu JE, Cordery JL, Rosen B, Kukenberger M. (2011). National diver-
       sity and organizational community of practice performance: The moderating effects
       of psychological safety and media richness. Unpublished manuscript.
Kline RB. (1998). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. New York, NY:
       Guilford.
Kohli AK, Jaworksi BJ. (1994). The influence of coworker feedback on salespeople. Journal
       of Marketing, 58, 82–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1251918
*Kostopoulos KC, Bozionelos N. (2011). Team exploratory and exploitative learning:
       Psychological safety, task conflict, and team performance. Group & Organization
       Management, 36, 385–415. doi: 10.1177/1059601111405985
*Lam N. (2010). Passing the baton: Middle managers as conduits of employee
       improvement-oriented voice. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), New York Uni-
       versity, Graduate School of Business Administration.
Landis RS. (2013). Successfully combining meta-analysis and structural equation mod-
       eling: Recommendations and strategies. Journal of Business and Psychology, 28,
       251–261. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10869-013-9285-x
*Lau DC, Murnighan JK. (2005). Interactions within groups and subgroups: The effects
       of demographic faultlines. Academy of Management Journal, 48, 645–659. doi:
       10.5465/AMJ.2005.17843943
*Lee JY, Swink M, Pandejpong T. (2011). The role of worker expertise, information
       sharing quality, and psychological safety in manufacturing process innovation: An
       intellectual capital perspective. Production and Operations Management, 20, 556–
       570. doi: 10.1111/j.1937-5956.2010.01172.x
LePine JA, Buckman BR, Crawford ER, Methot JR. (2011). A review of re-
       search on personality in teams: Accounting for pathways spanning levels
       of theory and analysis. Human Resource Management Review, 21, 311–330.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2010.10.004
*Leroy H, Dierynck B, Anseel F, Simons T, Halbesleben JRB, McCaughey D, Savage
       GT, Sels L. (2012). Behavioral integrity for safety, priority of safety, psychological
       safety, and patient safety: A team level study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97,
       1273–1281. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030076
Levashina J, Hartwell CJ, Morgeson FP, Campion MA. (2014). The structured employment
       interview: Narrative and quantitative review of the research literature. P ERSONNEL
       P SYCHOLOGY, 67, 241–293. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/peps.12052
Levinson H. (1965). Reciprocation: The relationship between man and organization. Ad-
       ministrative Science Quarterly, 9, 370–390. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2391032

                            M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                    159


*Li AN, Tan HH. (2013). What happens when you trust your supervisor? Mediators of
       individual performance in trust relationships. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
       34, 407–425. doi: 10.1002/job.1812
*Li N, Yan J. (2009). The effects of trust climate on individual performance. Frontiers of
       Business Research in China, 3, 27–49. doi: 10.1007/s11782-009-0002-6
*Liang J, Farh C, Farh J. (2012). Psychological antecedents of promotive and prohibitive
       voice: A two-wave examination. Academy of Management Journal, 55, 71–92.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/amj.2010.0176
*Madjar N, Ortiz-Walters R. (2009). Trust in supervisors and trust in customers: Their
       independent, relative, and joint effects on employee performance and creativity.
       Human Performance, 22, 128–142. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08959280902743501
*Malik ME, Danish RQ, Munir Y. (2012). Determinants of learning organization
       in higher education institutes of Pakistan: A correlational study. Interna-
       tional Journal of Innovation, Management and Technology, 3, 117–120. doi:
       10.7763/IJIMT.2012.V3.208
*Marone J, Tesluk P. (2008, April). A study of shared mental models team expertise.
       Paper presented at the 23rd Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and
       Organizational Psychology, San Francisco, CA.
*May DR, Gilson RL, Harter LM. (2004). The psychological conditions of mean-
       ingfulness, safety and availability and the engagement of the human spirit
       at work. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 77, 11–37.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1348/096317904322915892
Mayer RC, Davis JH, Schoorman FD. (1995). An integrative model of organiza-
       tional trust. Academy of Management Review, 20, 709–734. http://dx.doi.org/
       10.5465/AMR.1995.9508080335
Mayer RC, Gavin MB. (2005). Trust in management and performance: Who minds the
       shop while the employees watch the boss? The Academy of Management Journal,
       48, 874–888. http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2005.18803928
Meyer JP, Allen NJ. (1991). A three-component conceptualization of organizational
       commitment. Human Resource Management Review, 1, 61–89. http://dx.doi.org/
       10.1016/1053-4822(91)90011-Z
Morrow SL, McGonagle AK, Dove-Steinkamp ML, Walker Jr CT, Marmet M, Barnes-
       Farrell JL. (2010). Relationships between psychological safety climate facets and
       safety behavior in the rail industry: A dominance analysis. Accident Analysis and
       Prevention, 42, 1460–1467. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2009.08.011
*Mu SH, Gnyawali DR. (2003). Developing synergistic knowledge in student groups.
       Journal of Higher Education, 74, 689–711. doi: 10.1353/jhe.2003.0040
Nahrgang JD, Morgeson FP, Hofmann DA. (2011). Safety at work: A meta-analytic
       investigation of the link between job demands, job resources, burnout, en-
       gagement, and safety outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 71–94.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021484
Naumann SE, Bennett N. (2000). A case of procedural justice climate: Development and
       test of a multilevel model. Academy of Management Journal, 43, 881–889. doi:
       10.2307/1556416
*Nemanich LA, Vera D. (2009). Transformational leadership and ambidexterity in
       the context of an acquisition. Leadership Quarterly, 20, 19–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.
       1016/j.leaqua.2008.11.002
*Nembhard IM. (2007). Organizational learning in health care: A multi-method study of
       quality improvement collaboratives. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Harvard
       University.

160                         PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


*Nembhard IM, Edmondson AC. (2006). Making it safe: The effects of leader inclusiveness
      and professional status on psychological safety and improvement efforts in health
      care teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 27, 941–966. doi: 10.1002/job.413
Nembhard IM, Edmondson AC. (2011). Psychological safety: A foundation for speaking
      up, collaboration, and experimentation. In KS Cameron, GM Spreitzer (Eds.), The
      Oxford handbook of positive organizational scholarship (pp. 490–503). Oxford,
      UK: Oxford University Press.
*Nicholson G, Newton C, McGregor-Lowndes M. (2012). The nonprofit board as a team:
      Pilot results and initial insights. Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 22, 461–
      481. doi: 10.1002/nml.21040
Nicholson N, Soane E, Fenton-O’Creevy M, Willman P. (2005). Personality and
      domain-specific risk taking. Journal of Risk and Research, 8, 157–176.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1366987032000123856
Offermann LR, Hellmann PS. (1997). Culture’s consequences for leadership behavior:
      National values in action. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 28, 342–351.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022022197283008
Ofori-Dankwa J, Julian SD. (2001). Complexifying organizational theory: Illustra-
      tions using time research. Academy of Management Review, 26, 415–430.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/AMR.2001.4845809
*O’Neill OA. (2009). Workplace expression of emotions and escalation of commit-
      ment. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39, 2396–2424. doi: 10.1111/j.1559-
      1816.2009.00531.x
*O’Neill BS, Arendt LA. (2008). Psychological climate and work attitudes. Journal
      of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 14, 353–370. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
      1548051808315553
Organ DW. (1988). OCB: The good soldier syndrome. Lexington MA: Lexington Book.
*Ormond WE. (2003). Thinking ahead: A system approach to understanding individual
      leadership capacity and performance effectiveness in organizations. (Unpublished
      doctoral dissertation), University of Calgary.
*Ortega A, Sanchez-Manzanares M, Gil F, Rico R. (2010). Team learning and effectiveness
      in virtual project teams: The role of beliefs about interpersonal context. Spanish Jour-
      nal of Psychology, 13, 267–276. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S113874160000384X
*Owens B, McCornack A. (2010, August). The influence of humility on team psychological
      safety, cohesion, task allocation effectiveness, efficacy, and performance. Paper
      presented at the Annual Academy of Management Conference, Montreal, Canada.
*Ozcelik H. (2004). Emotional fit in the workplace: Its psychological and behavioral
      outcomes. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Bosphorus University.
*Pacharapha T, Vichita VR. (2012). Knowledge acquisition: The roles of perceived value
      of knowledge content and source. Journal of Knowledge Management, 16, 724–739.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/13673271211262772
*Palanski ME, Vogelgesang GR. (2011). Virtuous creativity: The effects of leader be-
      havioural integrity on follower creative thinking and risk taking. Canadian Journal
      of Administrative Sciences-Revue Canadienne Des Sciences De L Administration,
      28, 259–269. doi: 10.1002/cjas.219
*Pandejpong T. (2008). Impact of invention-to-implementation distance on manufacturing
      process implementation performance: Does the implementation team’s ability to
      learn matter? (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Michigan State University.
*Paunova M, Lee YT. (2011, August). Learning goal orientation and leadership emergence
      in multicultural teams: A moderated process model. Paper presented at the Annual
      Conference of Academy of Management, San Antonio, TX.

                           M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                    161


Payne SC, Youngcourt SS, Beaubien JM. (2007). A meta-analytic examination of the
        goal orientation nomological net. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 128–150. doi:
        10.1037/0021-9010.92.1.128
*Pearsall MJ, Ellis APJ. (2011). Thick as thieves: The effects of ethical orientation and
        psychological safety on unethical team behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology,
        96, 401–411. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021503
Pelletier KL, Bligh MC. (2006). Rebounding from corruption: Perceptions of ethics pro-
        gram effectiveness in a public sector organization. Journal of Business Ethics, 67,
        359–374. doi: 10.1007/s10551-006-9027-3
*Peltokorpi V. (2004). Transactive memory directories in small work units. Personnel
        Review, 33, 446–467. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00483480410539515
Perry-Smith JE. (2006). Social yet creative: The role of social relationships in fa-
        cilitating individual creativity. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 85–101.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/20159747
Podsakoff PM, MacKenzie SB, Lee JY, Podsakoff NP. (2003). Common method bias in
        behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended reme-
        dies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 879–903. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-
        9010.88.5.879
Podsakoff PM, MacKenzie SB, Podsakoff NP. (2012). Sources of method bias in social
        science research and recommendations on how to control it. Annual Review of
        Psychology, 63, 539–569. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-120710-100452
Podsakoff NP, Whiting SW, Podsakoff PM, Blume BD. (2009). Individual- and
        organizational-level consequences of organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-
        analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 122–141. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
        a0013079
*Post C. (2012). Deep-level team composition and innovation: The mediating roles of
        psychological safety and cooperative learning. Group & Organization Management,
        37, 555–588. doi:10.1177/1059601112456289
Ragin CC. (2000). Fuzzy-set social science. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press
*Rathert C, Ishqaidef G, May DR. (2009). Improving work environments in health care:
        Test of a theoretical framework. Health Care Management Review, 34, 334–343.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/HMR.0b013e3181abce2b
Rhoades L, Eisenberger R. (2002). Perceived organizational support: A review of the liter-
        ature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 698–714. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-
        9010.87.4.698
Rich BL, LePine JA, Crawford ER. (2010). Job engagement: Antecedents and ef-
        fects on job performance. Academy of Management Journal, 53, 617–635.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2010.51468988
*Roberge ME. (2007). When and how does diversity increase group performance? A
        theoretical model followed by an experimental study. (Unpublished doctoral disser-
        tation), Ohio State University.
Rosenthal R. (1979). The file drawer problem and tolerance for null results. Psychological
        Bulletin, 86, 638–641. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.86.3.638
*Rothmann S, Welsh C. (2013). Employee engagement: The role of psychological condi-
        tions. Management Dynamics, 22, 14–25.
Rousseau D. (1985). Issues of level in organizational research: Multilevel and cross-level
        perspectives. In LL Cummings & BM Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational
        behavior (Vol. 7, pp. 1–37). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
*Roussin CJ, Webber SS. (2012). Impact of organizational identification and psychological
        safety on initial perceptions of coworker trustworthiness. Journal of Business and
        Psychology, 27, 317–329. doi:10.1007/s10869-011-9245-2

162                        PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


Saks AM. (2006). Antecedents and consequences of employee engagement.
       Journal of Managerial Psychology, 7, 600–619. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/
       02683940610690169
*Schaubroeck J, Lam SSK, Peng ACY. (2011). Cognition-based and affect-based trust as
       mediators of leader behavior influences on team performance. Journal of Applied
       Psychology, 96, 863–871. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0022625
Schein EH. (1985). Organizational culture and leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schein EH. (1993). How can organizations learn faster? The challenge of entering the green
       room. Sloan Management Review, 34, 85–92.
Schein EH, Bennis WG. (1965). Personal and organizational change through group meth-
       ods: The laboratory approach. New York, NY: Wiley.
*Schepers J, de Jong A, Wetzels M, de Ruyter K. (2008). Psychological safety and social
       support in groupware adoption: A multi-level assessment in education. Computers
       & Education, 51, 757–775. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2007.08.001
Schmidt FL, Hunter JE. (1977). Development of a general solution to the prob-
       lem of validity generalization. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62, 529–540.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.62.5.529
*Schulte M, Cohen NA, Klein KJ. (2012). The coevolution of network ties and perceptions
       of team psychological safety. Organization Science, 23, 564–581. http://dx.doi.
       org/10.1287/orsc.1100.0582
Seibert SE, Crant JM, Kraimer ML. (1999). Proactive personality and career suc-
       cess. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 416–427. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0021-
       9010.62.5.529
Seibert SE, Wang G, Courtright SH. (2011). Antecedents and consequences of psycholog-
       ical and team empowerment in organizations: A meta-analytic review. Journal of
       Applied Psychology, 96, 981–1003. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0022676
*Siemsen E, Roth AV, Balasubramanian S, Anand G. (2009). The influence of psy-
       chological safety and confidence in knowledge on employee knowledge sharing.
       Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 11, 429–447. http://dx.doi.
       org/10.1287/msom.1080.0233
*Singh B, Winkel DE. (2012). Racial differences in helping behaviors: The role of
       respect, safety and identification. Journal of Business Ethics, 106, 467–477.
       doi:10.1007/s10551-011-1011-x
*Singh B, Winkel DE, Selvarajan TT. (2013). Managing diversity at work: Does psychologi-
       cal safety hold the key to racial differences in employee performance? Journal of Oc-
       cupational and Organizational Psychology, 86, 242–263. doi: 10.1111/joop.12015
*Soares AE, Lopes MP. (2012, August). The influence of social networks on the team’s
       psychological safety. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of Academy of
       Management, Boston, MA.
Spector PE, Brannick MT. (2011). Methodological urban legends: The misuse of
       statistical control variables. Organizational Research Methods, 14, 287–305.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1094428110369842
Spreitzer GM. (1995). Psychological empowerment in the workplace: Dimensions, mea-
       surement, and validation. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 1442–1465. doi:
       10.2037/256865
*Stalmeijer RE, Gijselaers WH, Wolfhagen I, Harendza S, Scherpbier A. (2007). How
       interdisciplinary teams can create multi-disciplinary education: the interplay be-
       tween team processes and educational quality. Medical Education, 41, 1059–1066.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2923.2007.02898.x

                            M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                     163


Swann WB, Read SJ. (1981). Self-verification processes: How we sustain our
        self-conceptions. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 351–372.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0022-1031(81)90043-3
*Tangirala S, Kamdar D, Venkataramani V, Parke MR. (2013). Doing right versus get-
        ting ahead: The effects of duty and achievement orientations on employees’ voice.
        Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 1040–1050. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0033855
Taras V, Kirkman BL, Steel P. (2010). Examining the impact of Culture’s consequences:
        A three-decade, multilevel, meta-analytic review of Hofstede’s value dimensions.
        Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 405–439. doi: 10.1037/a0018938
Taras V, Steel P, Kirkman BL. (2012). Improving national cultural indices using a lon-
        gitudinal meta-analysis of Hofstede’s dimensions. Journal of World Business, 47,
        329–341. doi: 10.1016/j.jwb.2011.05.001
Theobald R. (1990). Corruption, development and underdevelopment. Durham, NC: Duke
        University Press.
Thoits PA. (1995). Stress, coping, and social support processes: Where are we? What next?
        Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 35, 53–79. doi: 10.2307/2626957
Tomlinson EC, Mayer RC. (2009). The role of causal attribution dimensions in trust repair.
        Academy of Management Review, 34, 85–104. doi: 10.5465/AMR.2009.35713291
*Tröster C, Van Knippenberg D. (2012). Leader openness, nationality dissimilarity, and
        voice in multinational management teams. Journal of International Business Studies,
        43, 591–613. doi: 10.1057/jibs.2012.15
Tubre TC, Collins JM. (2000). Jackson and Schuler (1985) revisited: A meta-analysis of the
        relationships between role ambiguity, role conflict, and job performance. Journal of
        Management, 26, 155–169. doi: 10.1177/014920630002600104
*Tucker AL. (2007). An empirical study of system improvement by frontline employees
        in hospital units. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 9, 492–505.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/msom.1060.0156
*Tucker AL, Nembhard IM, Edmondson AC. (2007). Implementing new practices: An em-
        pirical study of organizational learning in hospital intensive care units. Management
        Science, 53, 894–907. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1060.0692
*Tynan R. (2005). The effects of threat sensitivity and face giving on dyadic psychological
        safety and upward communication. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 35, 223–
        247. doi: 10.1111/j.1559-1816.2005.tb02119.x
*Ulloa BCR, Adams SG. (2004). Attitude toward teamwork and effective team-
        ing. Team Performance Management, 10, 145–151. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/
        13527590410569869
*van der Rijt J, van de Wiel MWJ, Van den Bossche P, Segers MSR, Gijselaers WH.
        (2012). Contextual antecedents of informal feedback in the workplace. Human
        Resource Development Quarterly, 23, 233–257. doi: 10.1002/hrdq.21129
Van Dyne L, LePine JA. (1998). Helping and voice extra-role behaviors: Evidence of
        construct and predictive validity. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 108–119.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/256902
*van Gennip N, Gijbels D, Segers M, Tillema H. (2010). Reactions to 360 feed-
        back: The role of trust and trust-related variables. International Journal of
        Human Resources Development and Management, 10, 362–379. http://dx.doi.
        org/10.1504/IJHRDM.2010.036088
*van Gennip NAE, Segers MSR, Tillema HH. (2010). Peer assessment as a collaborative
        learning activity: The role of interpersonal variables and conceptions. Learning and
        Instruction, 20, 280–290. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2009.08.010

164                        PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY


Van Maanen J, Schein EH. (1977). Toward a theory of organizational socialization. In Staw
      BM (Ed.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 1, pp. 209–264). Greenwich,
      CT: JAI Press.
*Vandree K, Silva ND. (2007, April). Predicting individual creative performance from
      contextual factors. Paper presented at the 22nd Annual Conference of the Society
      for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, New York City.
*Vashdi DR. (2013). Teams in public administration: A field study of team feedback and ef-
      fectiveness in the Israeli public healthcare system. International Public Management
      Journal, 16, 275–306. doi:10.1080/10967494.2013.817255
Viechtbauer W. (2010). Conducting meta-analyses in R with the metafor package. Journal
      of Statistical Software, 36, 1–48. http://dx.doi.org/10.18637/jss.v036.i03
Viswesvaran C, Ones D. (1995). Theory testing: Combining psychometric meta-analysis
      and structural equations modeling. P ERSONNEL P SYCHOLOGY, 48, 865–885.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6570.1995.tb01784.x
*Vogelgesang GR. (2008). How leader interactional transparency can impact follower
      psychological safety and role engagement. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Uni-
      versity of Nebraska Lincoln.
*Walumbwa FO, Schaubroeck J. (2009). Leader personality traits and employee voice
      behavior: Mediating roles of ethical leadership and work group psychological safety.
      Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 1275–1286. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015848
*Wang M, Lee C. (2012, August). Do job demands matter to adaptive selling behavior?
      Paper presented at the Annual Conference of Academy of Management, Boston,
      MA.
*Wang J, Leung K. (2011, August). The antecedents and consequents of individual psycho-
      logically safe communication climate. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of
      Academy of Management, San Antonio, TX.
Wang G, Oh I, Courtright SH, Colbert AE. (2011). Transformational leadership and
      performance across criteria and levels: A meta-analytic review of 25 years
      of research. Group & Organization Management, 36, 223–270. doi: 10.1177/
      1059601111401017
*Wen P, Cheng C. (2011, August). Why does supervisory mentoring work? The mediating
      role of psychological safety. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of Academy
      of Management, San Antonio, TX.
White LA, Young M, Hunter AE, Rumsey MG. (2008). Lessons learned in transitioning
      personality measures from research to operational settings. Industrial and Organiza-
      tional Psychology, 1, 291–295. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1754-9434.2008.00049.x
Whitener EM. (1990). Confusion of confidence intervals and credibility intervals in
      meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 315–321. http://dx.doi.org/
      10.1037/0021-9010.75.3.315
Wiesenfeld BM, Raghuram S, Garud R. (2001). Organizational identification among
      virtual workers: The role of need for affiliation and perceived work-based so-
      cial support. Journal of Management, 27, 213–229. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
      014920630102700205
Wilkens R, London M. (2006). Relationships between climate, process, and performance
      in continuous quality improvement groups. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 69,
      510–523. doi: 10.1016/j.jvb.2006.05.005
Wimbush JC, Shepard JM. (1994). Toward an understanding of ethical climate: Its rela-
      tionship to ethical behavior and supervisory influence. Journal of Business Ethics,
      13, 637–647. doi: 10.1007/BF00871811
*Winton SL. (2009). A model of employee engagement: Examining the mediational role of
      job attitudes and vigor. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation), Saint Louis University.

                           M. LANCE FRAZIER ET AL.                                    165


*Wong A, Tjosvold D, Lu JF. (2010). Leadership values and learning in China: The
      mediating role of psychological safety. Asia Pacific Journal of Human Resources,
      48, 86–107. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1038411109355374
*Xiang C. (2012, August). The influence and mechanism of system responsiveness on
      voice. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of Academy of Management,
      Boston, MA.
*Xu Y. (2011). Gender influences on mental models of firm strategies. Gender in
      Management: An International Journal, 26, 513–528. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/
      17542411111175487
*Xu Y, Yang Y. (2010). Student learning in business simulation: An empirical investigation.
      Journal of Education for Business, 85, 223–228. doi: 10.1080/08832320903449469
*Zhang Y, Fang Y, Kwok-Kee W, Wang Z. (2012). Promoting the intention of students to
      continue their participation in e-learning systems. Information Technology & People,
      25, 356–375. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09593841211278776
*Zhang YX, Fang YL, Wei KK, Chen HP. (2010). Exploring the role of psycholog-
      ical safety in promoting the intention to continue sharing knowledge in virtual
      communities. International Journal of Information Management, 30, 425–436.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2010.02.003
*Zhao H, Peng Z, Han Y, Sheard G, Hudson A. (2013). Psychological mech-
      anism linking abusive supervision and compulsory citizenship behavior: A
      moderated mediation study. The Journal of Psychology, 147, 177–195. doi:
      10.1080/00223980.2012.680522
Zhou J, George JM. (2001). When job dissatisfaction leads to creativity: Encourag-
      ing the expression of voice. Academy of Management Journal, 44, 682–696.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3069410
Zohar D, Luria G. (2005). A multilevel model of safety climate: Cross-level relationships
      between organization and group-level climates. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90,
      616–628. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.90.4.616

