      The International Journal of Human Resource
      Management



      ISSN: 0958-5192 (Print) 1466-4399 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rijh20




Age diversity and learning outcomes in
organizational training groups: the role of
knowledge sharing and psychological safety

Fabiola H. Gerpott, Nale Lehmann-Willenbrock, Ramon Wenzel & Sven C.
Voelpel

To cite this article: Fabiola H. Gerpott, Nale Lehmann-Willenbrock, Ramon Wenzel & Sven C.
Voelpel (2019): Age diversity and learning outcomes in organizational training groups: the role
of knowledge sharing and psychological safety, The International Journal of Human Resource
Management, DOI: 10.1080/09585192.2019.1640763

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2019.1640763




       Published online: 22 Jul 2019.



       Submit your article to this journal



       View Crossmark data




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rijh20

THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2019.1640763




Age diversity and learning outcomes in
organizational training groups: the role of knowledge
sharing and psychological safety
Fabiola H. Gerpotta, Nale Lehmann-Willenbrockb, Ramon Wenzelc and
Sven C. Voelpeld
a
 WHU – Otto Beisheim School of Management, D€     usseldorf, Germany; bFaculty of Economics
and Social Sciences, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany; cCentre for Social Impact,
University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia; dDepartment of Business Administration,
Jacobs University Bremen, Bremen, Germany


    ABSTRACT                                                                   KEYWORDS
    This study advances theorizing on human resource devel-                    Age diversity; knowledge
    opment by conceptualizing a training group’s age diversity                 sharing; learning;
    composition as an antecedent of participants’ learning out-                psychological
                                                                               safety; training
    comes in organizational training courses. Drawing from
    social identity theory, we propose that a high age diversity
    of the training group can inhibit participants’ learning out-
    comes because individuals are less likely to share know-
    ledge than in age-homogenous groups. Furthermore, we
    expect that psychological safety serves as a buffer, such
    that participants who perceive a high level of psychological
    safety in a training group will engage in knowledge sharing
    and consequently report high learning outcomes, regard-
    less of the training group’s age diversity composition. We
    tested the proposed moderated mediation model in a sam-
    ple of 211 employees participating in an interactive one-
    day training at an automobile manufacturer. We found that
    perceived age diversity, but not objective age diversity, was
    negatively linked to participants’ learning outcomes and
    that this relationship was mediated by knowledge sharing.
    Participants’ perceptions of psychological safety served as a
    buffer against the negative effect of perceived age diver-
    sity. We discuss implications for the conceptual understand-
    ing of learning as an active process shaped by the training
    group and encourage scholars to broaden their under-
    standing of training design elements.




Introduction
In Western industrialized countries, demographic shifts have led to a
workforce characterized by an increasing age diversity and higher

CONTACT Fabiola H. Gerpott        fabiola.gerpott@whu.edu      WHU – Otto Beisheim School of Management,
Erkrather Str. 224a, 40233 D€
                            usseldorf, Germany.
ß 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

2    F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


average retirement age (Kulik, Ryan, Harper, & George, 2014). These
societal changes imply major challenges for human resource management
(Drabe, Hauff, & Richter, 2015) because organizations need to ensure
that employees’ knowledge and skills remain up to date across all age
groups (Zacher, Kooij, & Beier, 2018). As a result, human resource
development programs are increasingly attended by employees from dif-
ferent age groups. Organizations spend a considerable amount of resour-
ces on developing their employees, for example US$1,252 in the United
States per year and employee (ATD, 2016) and 1,067 Euros in Germany
(German Economic Institute, 2017). Hence, it is important to ensure that
training programs yield high learning outcomes (Sitzmann &
Weinhardt, 2018).
   To reach this goal, research has begun to investigate how the specific
learning needs of different age groups can be addressed through adap-
tions of the training design (e.g., Nassar et al., 2016; Wolfson, Cavanagh,
& Kraiger, 2014). Yet, an age-diverse workforce may not only vary with
regards to learning needs, but also constitutes a training design element
that potentially influences participants’ learning outcomes. As part of the
learning process, participants of formal training programs—that is, cur-
riculum-based offerings provided by an organization with the ultimate
goal of enhancing performance (Cerasoli et al., 2018)—often interact
intensively with each other about their knowledge. Knowledge sharing
interactions constitute an important component of the learning process
because learning is an active process of acquiring and refining expert
and practical knowledge (Kostopoulos & Bozionelos, 2011). However,
findings from the diversity literature suggest that members of age-diverse
groups may be less likely to openly engage in knowledge sharing
(Ellwart, B€undgens & Rack, 2013). Hence, although the age diversity
composition of training groups has received only limited scholarly atten-
tion so far, there are reasons to expect that it influences processes and
outcomes in formal training settings that rely on interactions between
participants. By explicitly considering the role of a training group’s age
diversity composition in interactive training settings, this study offers
three main contributions.
   First, we extend theorizing on training design elements in terms of
attributes that characterize the learning experience (Bell, Tannenbaum,
Ford, Noe, & Kraiger, 2017). Particularly, we draw from social identity
theory (Tajfel & Turner, 2004) to conceptualize the training group’s age
diversity composition as a training design element that constitutes a
potential risk for participants’ evaluations of their learning outcomes in
interactive training settings. Social identity theory posits that individuals
continuously define their identity in relation to the social environment,

                     THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT   3


thereby striving to uphold a positive self-image (Tajfel & Turner, 2004).
Accordingly, individuals tend to prefer others whom they perceive as
similar because these in-group members likely confirm their self-image.
In contrast, when individuals feel dissimilar to others, this gives rise to
feelings of anxiety about opening up because dissimilar interaction part-
ners may see things differently than the sender, which constitutes a
potential threat for the self-image. Individuals engage in self- and other-
categorization relative to individuals in other categories, which entails
that different aspects of one’s social identity may become more or less
salient depending on the context (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). In a training
setting in which participants are not previously acquainted, they will
likely make use of easily visible cues (Zellmer-Bruhn, Maloney, Bhappu,
& Salvador, 2008). Age is a salient individual characteristic that is auto-
matically assessed and triggers social categorization processes (Tajfel &
Turner, 2004). Consequently, a high age diversity of the group may
result in feelings of dissimilarity between training participants, which
may distract them from engaging with the training content and inhibit
their learning outcomes. Taking the notion serious that for these proc-
esses to occur participants must perceive the others as different (e.g.,
Shemla, Meyer, Greer, & Jehn, 2016), we untangle effects of the training
group’s objective age diversity (i.e., based on differences in participants’
chronological age) and perceived age diversity (i.e., based on perceived
differences in participants’ age) as predictors of participants’ evaluation
of their learning outcomes. This nuanced perspective addresses the call
for research that considers alternative age-related measurements in add-
ition to objective age (Burmeister, Fasbender, & Deller, 2018) and con-
tributes to the discussion on diversity as a subjective phenomenon (e.g.,
Ellwart et al., 2013; Shemla et al., 2016).
   Second, we add to a constructivist perspective on learning by investi-
gating knowledge sharing—that is, the purposeful or unintended activ-
ities through which information, skills, or expertise are exchanged with
others (Joshi, Sarker, & Sarker, 2007)—as a process through which the
training group’s age diversity affects participants’ evaluations of learning
outcomes. According to a constructivist learning perspective (Arib &
Hess, 1986; Yeo & Gold, 2011), knowledge sharing constitutes an import-
ant antecedent of learning because learning is an active process of
acquiring and refining expert and practical knowledge. Through know-
ledge sharing, participants reflect on their experiences, engage in deeper
information elaboration processes, become aware of knowledge gaps, and
link new information to existing knowledge (Nilsen & Ludvigsen, 2010;
Vance, Boje, Mendenhall, & Kropp, 1991). By positioning knowledge
sharing as a mediator in our model that links the training group’s age-

4    F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


diversity to participants’ learning outcomes, this study advances the
understanding of knowledge sharing as an active learning strategy and
points to a behavioral mechanism through which age-diversity may affect
participants’ learning outcomes in organizational training courses.
   Third, this research highlights the need to consider contextual factors
for understanding the identity-related effects of age diversity on training
outcomes. Specifically, we build on previous research that has pointed to
psychological safety as an important enabler of learning (Edmondson,
1999; Edmondson & Lei, 2014). Psychological safety refers to a psycho-
logical condition characterized by the feeling that one can safely express
knowledge, thoughts, or ideas “without fear of negative consequences to
self-image, status, or career” (Kahn, 1990: 708). This entails that at high
levels of psychological safety, training participants may share their know-
ledge regardless of age differences in the group because they feel no
threat for their self-image when they express their knowledge.
Consequently, their learning outcomes should be high. In contrast, at
low levels of psychological safety, the training group’s age diversity com-
position inhibits participants’ knowledge sharing because they may be
afraid of critique. Taken together, we conceptualize psychological safety
as a buffer that may help alleviate the negative relationship between the
training group’s age diversity and participants’ learning outcomes
through knowledge sharing. Such insights are particularly useful for
managerial practice because organizations may find it difficult to change
a training group’s age diversity composition (or participants’ perceptions
thereof), but can—through interventions in the training or in the broader
human resource management context—proactively take steps to create
psychological safety in training settings.

Theoretical background
Learning refers to the long-lasting acquisition and refinement of both
expert and practical knowledge as an outcome of an individual’s inter-
action with the environment (DeSimone & Werner, 2012; Kostopoulos &
Bozionelos, 2011). That is, individuals engage in an active process of
relating novel information to previous experiences and assimilating this
information, rather than passively adopting it. This perspective is
grounded in constructivist learning research (Arib & Hess, 1986; Yeo &
Gold, 2011) and is becoming increasingly pertinent as the nature of
work is becoming more dynamic and complex. As a result, most individ-
uals—as employees and learners—find they fulfill far more responsible
and autonomous roles in acquiring and applying knowledge than a few
years ago (Parker, 2014). These changing work characteristics are

                    THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT   5


reflected in formal training programs that are increasingly conducted in
highly interactive ways (Bell et al., 2017). Whereas in former times the
passive consumption of instructor-led content was normal, today most
training courses require participants to engage in active discussions and
to make sense of the training content through their interactions (Bell
et al., 2017). As a consequence of such interactive learning approaches,
the training group’s age composition becomes an important element of
the training design because it can influence the interactions between
participants.
   Our theorizing focuses on interactive learning environments in
which the sharing of participants’ knowledge with others is crucial for
participants’ understanding, memorization and even creation of com-
plex knowledge. That is, the type of learning we address refers to
bidirectional knowledge construction that cannot occur without inter-
actions (Gerpott, Lehmann-Willenbrock, & Voelpel, 2017a) and that
critically relies on participants’ sharing of contextualized information
to make sense of them for oneself and others (Handley, Sturdy,
Fincham, & Clark, 2006). For example, a training on how to improve
a technological application in a specific production line will likely
result in low learning outcomes (i.e., acquisition of performance-rele-
vant knowledge) if the trainer only teaches general rules about con-
tinuous improvement. Instead, if participants share their knowledge
about how they applied the technological application in the past, then
others can challenge the underlying assumptions (Anthony, 2018) and
can function as catalysts who unlock the knowledge base (Tempest,
2003). Through this active sensemaking of the learning content, par-
ticipants become aware of inconsistencies and can integrate new
knowledge in their existing knowledge structures (Handley et al.,
2006), thus resulting in a high subjective learning experience about
how to improve the specific technological application.
   Social identity theory (Tajfel & Turner, 2004) provides a useful lens
for explaining why the training group’s composition may affect the
degree to which participants engage in open interactions with each other
to make sense of knowledge in interactive training settings. According to
this theoretical lens, individuals—irrespective of their age—continuously
(re)define their social identity by comparing themselves to others,
thereby aiming to uphold a stable self-image (Tajfel & Turner, 2004). To
confirm their self-image, individuals prefer co-workers who are similar
over colleagues whose attributes differ from their own. Others who are
perceived as similar are classified as belonging to the in-group and pre-
ferred as interaction partners. In contrast, others who are perceived as
dissimilar are categorized as out-group members and likely to be

6    F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


evaluated “through the biased lens of category stereotypes” (Polzer,
Milton, & Swann, 2002, p. 296).
   An individual’s social identity can be derived from various group
memberships, such as the organization, the department, age-cohort,
work group, and so on (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). An individual defines
him-/herself in terms of a social referent, such that for example “the cat-
egory of young is meaningful only in relation to the category of old”
(Ashforth & Mael, 1989: 21). If the social circumstances change, so do
the prevalent characteristics that drive in-/outgroup categorization proc-
esses. In other words, an individual’s social identity is partly a fluid phe-
nomenon and aspects of it may be more or less activated under varying
circumstances. For example, in one situation a self-categorization as a
young or old worker may be particularly present (e.g., interacting in an
age-diverse newly formed group with unknown colleagues), whereas in
other situations (e.g., having lunch with a well-known group of age-
diverse colleagues) parts of the identity that refer to one’s work-group
association are more prevalent.

Hypotheses development: age diversity and learning outcomes
In training groups comprised of relative strangers, a self- and other-cat-
egorization in terms of highly visible cues to form a first impression of
co-trainees is particularly likely because individuals seek to reduce uncer-
tainty (Zellmer-Bruhn et al., 2008). Age constitutes a noticeable cue that
is associated with a range of beliefs about values, attitudes toward work,
job satisfaction, or knowledge sharing and receiving intentions (e.g.,
Burmeister et al., 2018; Cennamo & Gardner, 2008; Macky, Gardner, &
Forsyth, 2008). When an individual perceives age differences in a train-
ing group, this enhances the self- and other-categorization as young or
old learner with certain attributes and also sparks ideas about what
members of the other age groups think of oneself (i.e., meta-stereotypes;
Finkelstein, King, & Voyles, 2015).
   Self-, other-, and meta-categorizations capture participants’ attention,
which constitutes a cognitive resource of limited availability that is par-
ticularly important in early skill-acquisition phases such as trainings
(Kanfer & Ackerman, 1989). In other words, in an age-diverse training
group, participants’ cognitive processes are at least partly directed
towards coping with inner or overt social tensions rather than towards
engaging with the learning process. For example, instead of concentrat-
ing energy on discussions about the training content, participants in an
age-diverse training group worry about what others think of their know-
ledge or their learning speed and whether they are able to successfully

                      THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT       7


complete the training (Gerpott, Lehmann-Willenbrock, & Voelpel,
2017b). Such stereotype- and meta-stereotype-related thoughts deplete
cognitive resources (King, Kaplan, & Zaccaro, 2008; Ryan, King, &
Finkelstein, 2015), which accordingly cannot be spend on processing the
information provided in the training. Given that training participants’
cognitive resource allocation to the training content constitutes an essen-
tial element of the learning process (Kanfer & Ackerman, 1989), we
hypothesize the following:
  HYPOTHESIS 1. The training group’s age diversity is negatively associated with
  participants’ learning outcomes.



Learning through knowledge sharing
So far, we have explained why the training group’s age diversity composition
may trigger participants’ allocation of cognitive resources on aspects beyond
the training content, which can impair learning outcomes. Next, we turn to
a process that is particularly important in interactive trainings and that may
suffer from reduced cognitive resource allocation. More specifically, we
focus on participants’ knowledge sharing as a central mechanism through
which age diversity links to learning outcomes. Knowledge sharing describes
all activities of participants through which information, skills, or expertise
are exchanged with others (Joshi et al., 2007). Interactive training programs
critically rely on the social construction of learning through the exchange of
knowledge (Dudley-Marling, 2012). When sharing knowledge, individuals
reflect on their experiences by putting them into words, engage in deeper
information elaboration, become aware of knowledge gaps, seek informa-
tion, and link new insights to existing knowledge (Nilsen, & Ludvigsen,
2010; Vance et al., 1991). As such, knowledge sharing can foster impromptu
discovery and new insights (Vance et al., 1991). According to a constructivist
learning perspective (Arib & Hess, 1986; Yeo & Gold, 2011), an active sense-
making process through talking about one’s knowledge and explaining it to
others enhances learning through the integration of existing and new know-
ledge (Handley et al., 2006).
   While age-diverse training groups can potentially profit from the rich
knowledge base of their members that can be used to help each other in the
sensemaking process through knowledge sharing (Burmeister et al., 2018;
Gerpott et al., 2017b), participants’ knowledge sharing activities are also par-
ticularly at risk in age-diverse training groups. This is because sharing one’s
knowledge allows others to judge the quality of one’s know-how (Husted &
Michailova, 2002). In other words, knowledge sharing involves a certain risk
for the sender as others’ reactions to this activity can potentially threaten the
sender’s image (Gerpott, Fasbender, & Burmeister, in press). Feeling secure

8      F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


about one’s image both internally and externally is an important pre-condi-
tion to engage in behaviors such as knowledge sharing for which outcomes
are unsure and may even include that one may ultimately need to change
the (self-)image because one realizes that the own knowledge structures are
outdated or insufficient (Edmondson, 2002; Ye, Chen, & Jin, 2006).
Accordingly, in diverse groups, subgroup categorization and fear of rejection
can inhibit knowledge sharing (Van Ginkel & Van Knippenberg, 2008). To
conclude, while knowledge sharing constitutes an important mechanism
through which participants in age-diverse training groups can receive feed-
back on their knowledge and use it as an active sense-making strategy to
ultimately achieve higher learning outcomes, this activity is also particularly
at risk due to social categorization processes. We thus hypothesize
the following:
    HYPOTHESIS 2. Participants’ knowledge sharing partially mediates the negative
    relationship between the training group’s age diversity and participants’
    learning outcomes.



Psychological safety as a buffer
Psychological safety refers to the belief that risk taking in an organiza-
tional environment is a secure endeavor. It is defined as a psychological
condition characterized by a sense of confidence that others will not
embarrass, reject, or punish someone for speaking up (Edmondson, 1999).
That is, an employee who feels psychologically safe has the impression
that s/he can express knowledge, thoughts, or ideas without being afraid
of negative consequences to the self-image (Kahn, 1990). Notably, psycho-
logical safety can be assessed at three different levels (i.e., individual, team,
organization) depending on the research focus and investigated outcomes
(for an overview see Edmondson & Lei, 2014). Given that this study con-
centrates on learning as an outcome attributable to the individual, we con-
tribute to the research stream on individual-level psychological safety.
   In situations characterized by insufficient information—such as a
training with participants who are not previously acquainted with one
another—perceptions of high psychological safety can enhance a partici-
pant’s belief that sharing knowledge is a safe endeavor because s/he will
feel less threatened by exposure to the judgment of the recipients. The
risk of knowledge sharing (i.e., being seen as ignorant, incompetent, or
just disruptive) that is particularly evident when interacting with dissimi-
lar others in a learning environment is thus reduced if a participant
experiences psychological safety (Edmondson, 2002). In other words,
knowledge sharing is more likely to occur when group members are
familiar with and trust each other (Connelly & Kelloway, 2003). Indeed,

                        THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT            9


perceptions of psychological safety were found to help employees to feel
comfortable to share their knowledge in new settings (Siemsen, Roth,
Balasubramanian, & Anand, 2009) and contributed to developing trust in
unknown individuals (Roussin & Webber, 2012). With psychological
safety, individuals are less concerned with self-protection from dissimilar
others in ambiguous environments, but instead motivated to actively
approach their colleagues (Kahn, 1990).
   On the basis of these findings, we propose that in a training experi-
ence in which a participant perceives high psychological safety, the nega-
tive effect of age diversity on lower levels of knowledge sharing will
occur to a lower extent. That is, at high levels of psychological safety, it
does not matter whether the group is age-diverse or not, participants will
share their knowledge because they are less afraid of negative reactions
from dissimilar others and more likely to appreciate and integrate each
other’s unique knowledge (Zellmer-Bruhn et al., 2008). In contrast,
under conditions of low psychological safety, the threat for one’s self-
image becomes pertinent and participants may be less likely to talk about
their knowledge. This behavior (i.e., sharing knowledge in age-diverse
training groups only when one feels psychologically safe) is both socio-
emotional (i.e., participants prefer others’ approval than disapproval) and
instrumental (i.e., valued rewards may be dependent on others in the
workplace) (Edmondson, 2002). To summarize, we hypothesize:
  HYPOTHESIS 3. Psychological safety moderates the negative effect of a training
  group’s age diversity on participants’ knowledge sharing, such that the
  relationship is weaker for participants who perceive high psychological safety than
  those who perceive low psychological safety.

   From our line of argumentation, it logically follows that the overall
effect of age diversity through knowledge sharing on learning outcomes
is conditional on the level of psychological safety. This is because an
indirect effect is a product of two effects (the effect of X on M and the
effect of M on Y controlling for X). If one of these effects is moderated,
then so too is the indirect effect (Muller, Judd, & Yzerbyt, 2005;
Preacher, Rucker, & Hayes, 2007). In other words, if the interaction
effect between the training group’s age diversity and psychological safety
on knowledge sharing is significant, then the indirect effect of age diver-
sity on learning outcomes through knowledge sharing should be moder-
ated, too. To summarize our complete model (see Figure 1), we state:

  HYPOTHESIS 4. Psychological safety moderates the negative effect of a training
  group’s age diversity on participants’ learning outcomes through participants’
  knowledge sharing, such that the relationship is weaker for participants who perceive
  high psychological safety than those who perceive low psychological safety.

10       F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.




                 Psychological      Knowledge sharing
               safety perceptions



          (Perceived/objective)
           age diversity of the                              Learning
                                                             outcomes
             training group

Figure 1. Conceptual model.

Objective versus perceived age diversity
Thus far, we have outlined why we expect training groups’ age-diversity
composition and associated knowledge sharing behaviors to have detrimen-
tal effects on participants’ learning outcomes. Furthermore, we have posi-
tioned psychological safety as a potential buffer against these effects.
However, given that our theorizing relies on participants’ cognitive percep-
tions of dissimilarities, it is important to acknowledge a debate that recently
evolved around the notion that diversity may only matter if individuals rec-
ognize that others differ from them (for a review, see Shemla et al., 2016).
   A close look at the definition of diversity highlights differences between
individuals regarding attributes that may lead to the perception that
another person differs from oneself (Shemla & Meyer, 2012; Van
Knippenberg, De Dreu, & Homan, 2004). This definition implies that
diversity only influences learning outcomes if it is perceived by the recipi-
ent. Perceived diversity describes the subjective perceptions of a group’s
diverse composition, which does not necessarily reflect its objective diver-
sity attributes (i.e., its composition in terms of participants’ chronological
age). Indeed, studies measuring both objective and perceived diversity
report weak or no relationships between the two variables (e.g., Hentschel,
Shemla, Wegge, & Kearney, 2013). However, given that perceptions of age
diversity may be the driver of social identity-related processes rather than
objective age diversity, we pose the following hypothesis:
     HYPOTHESIS 5. The hypothesized relationships are stronger for the perceived
     (compared to the objective) age diversity of the training group.



Methods
Sample and procedure
We gathered data from 211 employees (83% male) of a global automo-
bile manufacturer’s plant in Germany, who participated in a one-day
training lasting 7 h. We chose an automotive company as a research set-
ting because the aging workforce constitutes a central challenge in this
industry (Streb, Voelpel, & Leibold, 2009). The training groups were

                    THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT   11


heterogeneous in terms of age but homogenous in terms of other diver-
sity attributes (i.e., mostly male, same cultural background), so that the
likelihood of obtaining confounding diversity variables was reduced
(Gerpott et al., 2017b). Furthermore, owing to the size of the plant (i.e.,
over 12,000 employees), most of the training participants came from dif-
ferent departments and did not know or met each other before the train-
ing day. This setting was chosen to allow for immediate categorization
processes to take place because these processes are particularly likely to
occur in newly formed groups.
   The training was aimed at teaching the principles of continuous
improvement, that is, the ongoing endeavor to increase the quality of
processes, products, and services. Newly hired employees, foremen, and
all employees in managerial positions were encouraged to participate in
the voluntary training and were excused from work during the times
scheduled for it. The trainers were two experts on continuous improve-
ment who had conducted the training for over a year at the time of data
collection. The trainers and the works council supported the
research project.
   We collected the data during all training courses on continuous
improvement that took place within one fiscal year. This provided us
with access to 18 one-day training courses with 10 to 14 participants
(M ¼ 11.72, SD ¼ 1.49). The participants’ average age was 33.5 years
(SD ¼ 9.84, minimum age ¼ 17 years, maximum age ¼ 60 years). About
87% of the trainees worked on the assembly line or in a related role. The
remaining 13% worked as team leaders who were responsible for produc-
tion teams.
   The training started with a 1-h introduction in a seminar room, after
which the trainees took part in a simulation of a production process at
an assembly line (half an hour). Subsequently, the trainer asked the
training group to optimize the production process in a self-directed
group-work process according to the continuous improvement principles
(4 h), after which their solution was implemented and tested in another
simulation round (1 h). The trainees then completed our questionnaire
and took part in a general feedback session with the trainer.
   Participants were informed that study participation was voluntary, that
their anonymity would be protected, and that by filling in the question-
naire they gave their informed consent to participate in this research. To
reduce evaluation apprehension, we notified participants that the data
would be analyzed outside the company, that the data collection was
approved by the worker’s council, and that results would only be
reported on an aggregated level. The first author of this article was on
site during every training session to answer questions about the project

12    F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


and collect the questionnaires. The data of this study are not publicly
available due to company restrictions but can be made accessible on
request by the corresponding author.

Measures
The training group’s objective age diversity was operationalized as the
within-group standard deviation of the training participants’ chrono-
logical age (Hentschel et al., 2013).
   All other variables were measured via self-report. Two bilingual trans-
lators conducted a back-translation procedure to generate the German
survey from the original English items. We relied on a survey design
because participants’ perceptions of age diversity and psychological safety
refer to private assessments that can only be described by the individual
experiencing them (Conway & Lance, 2010). Furthermore, peer-ratings
of knowledge sharing would have been difficult because participants
mostly did not know the others and thus were not particularly suited to
assess others of their actual level of expertise. Likewise, other rating sour-
ces (e.g., a supervisor or a colleague) might find it hard to judge learning
outcomes because the external rater may not be aware of the training
participants’ continuous improvement efforts as these activities often
consist of subtle workplace behaviors (Shally, Gilson, & Blum, 2009).
   The training group’s perceived age diversity was assessed with one
item developed by Harrison, Price, and Bell (1998): “How similar were
the participants of the training regarding their age?” The respondents
indicated their answers on a four-point Likert scale (1 ¼ completely dis-
similar, 4 ¼ completely similar).
   Knowledge sharing was measured with two items adopted from Faraj
and Lee (2000) using a six-point answering format ranging from 1
(“completely disagree”) to 6 (“completely agree”). The survey asked par-
ticipants to judge their sharing of codified expert knowledge (“I shared
my expert knowledge with the other participants”) and their contribution
of action-related information about how things work in the organization
(“I shared my experiences about processes and courses of action with the
other participants”). Cronbach’s alpha for the scale was a ¼ .90.
   Psychological safety was assessed through four items obtained from
Van Ginkel and Van Knippenberg (2008), which they adopt from
Edmondson (1999), who provides a detailed description of the qualitative
development phase and the discriminant validity of the scale.
Participants responded to the items on a six-point scale ranging from 1
(“completely disagree”) to 6 (“completely agree”). The items were as fol-
lows: “I had the impression the other group members wanted to hear

                      THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT   13


what I had to say,” “I had the impression the other group members
would appreciate discussion,” “I expected the other members to react
positively when I disagreed with them,” and “This group appreciated it
when I mentioned new information.” Cronbach’s alpha for the scale was
a ¼ .86.
   Learning outcomes were measured by means of three items adapted
from Magni, Paolino, Cappetta, and Proserpio (2013), using a six-point
answering format ranging from 1 (“completely disagree”) to 6
(“completely agree”). The items were as follows: “I gained new know-
ledge about processes and courses of action according to the principles
of continuous improvement through the training,” “I obtained new
knowledge about the principles of continuous improvement through the
training,” and “I obtained information and gained abilities in the training
that will help to improve my work performance.” The scale had a
Cronbach’s alpha of a ¼ .91.
   The control variables were individual age (in years), job position
(0 ¼ managerial function with responsibility, 1 ¼ regular employee with-
out managerial function), and gender (0 ¼ male, 1 ¼ female). We
included these control variables because previous research indicates they
may affect our variables of interest (e.g., Bausch, Michel, & Sonntag,
2014), and job position affected climate perceptions in the context of
knowledge work (Sveiby & Simons, 2002).

Analytical approach
Prior to hypothesis testing, we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis
using structural equation modeling (Mplus; Muthen & Muthen, 2012) to
ensure that psychological safety, knowledge sharing, and learning out-
comes were distinct constructs. The fit of the three-factor solution (v2/df
¼ 2.46, p < 0.01, RMSEA ¼ 0.08, CFI ¼ 0.96, SRMR ¼ 0.04) clearly out-
performed the baseline model, in which all items loaded on one factor
(v2/df ¼ 6.51, p < 0.01, RMSEA ¼ 0.16, CFI ¼ 0.83, SRMR ¼ 0.07).
  To test our hypotheses, we used regression analysis as well as
PROCESS 3.1 for SPSS (Hayes, 2013, 2015) to calculate the moderated
mediation index (i.e., PROCESS Model 7) with objective and perceived
age diversity as the independent variable, both with and without control
variables. The moderated mediation index is based on an interval esti-
mate of the parameter of a function linking the indirect effect to a mod-
erator’s values. This approach provides a single inferential test to
determine whether a test of moderated mediation is supported, which
occurs if the bootstrapping interval of the moderated mediation index
does not include zero.

14         F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


Table 1. Descriptive statistics and intercorrelations of study variables.
Variable              M      SD       (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)     (8)
1. Age              33.49    9.84
2. Job position      0.87    0.33   .20
3. Gender            0.17    0.38   .12       .14
4. Objective age     7.17    2.36    .08      .04      .08
   diversity
5. Perceived age     2.07    0.87   .25      .06     .12      .25
   diversity
6. Psychological     4.82    0.96    .08      .08      .06      .01      .33     (.86)
   safety
7. Knowledge         5.05    1.04    .11      .07      .07    .04       .37     .78   (.90)
   sharing
8. Learning          5.07    1.10   .01        .05     .05    .09       .42     .62   .66    (.91)
   outcomes
Notes. All variables were measured at the individual level (N ¼ 211; 0 ¼ manager, 1 ¼ worker; 0 ¼ female,
1 ¼ male), except for objective age diversity, which was measured at the team level (N ¼ 18, operationalized
as standard deviation of age within the group). Cronbach a values in brackets. p < .01 (two-tailed).




Results
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and correlations of the study
variables. Perceived and objective age diversity were moderately corre-
lated (r ¼ .25, p < .01). Perceived age diversity was negatively linked to
psychological safety (r ¼ .33, p < .01), knowledge sharing (r ¼ .37, p
< .01), and learning outcomes (r ¼ .42, p < .01). Objective age diver-
sity showed no significant relationship with these outcome variables.
These findings indicate that the hypothesized relationships are stronger
for perceptions (rather than objective indicators) of the training group’s
age diversity, which provides support for H5. We validated the indicative
evidence derived from the examination of the correlation matrix using
multilevel hierarchical regression (Hox, 2010), which revealed no signifi-
cant relationships between objective age diversity and psychological
safety (B ¼ .00, p ¼ .93), knowledge sharing (B ¼ .02, p ¼ .65), and
learning outcomes (B ¼ .05, p ¼ .32). In addition, we also ran the
moderated mediation model using PROCESS Model 7 with objective age
diversity as an independent variable. The results were not significant (see
Table A1 in the Appendix).1 Although these findings are in line with
H5, which stated that the hypothesized relationships are stronger for the
perceived (compared to the objective) age diversity of the training group,
a zero-effect of objective age diversity was not explicitly expected.
   In the next step, we tested our hypotheses with perceived age diversity
as an independent variable. In line with the recommendations of Spector
and Brannick (2011), in the following we report the estimates without
control variables because the inclusion of control variables did not essen-
tially change the result patterns. The results with control variables can be
found in Table A2 in the Appendix.

                         THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT           15




Figure 2. Interaction effect between perceived age diversity and psychological safety on par-
ticipants’ knowledge sharing.




   First, we found a direct negative effect in regressing learning outcomes
on perceived age diversity, F(1, 208) ¼ 43.22, p < .01. This provides sup-
port for H1. Second, in line with H2, knowledge sharing mediated the
negative association between perceived age diversity and learning out-
comes, F(2, 207) ¼ 33.57, p < .01. Third, we found a significant inter-
action effect, such that when psychological safety was low, perceived age
diversity inhibited trainees’ knowledge sharing behavior, F(3, 206) ¼
90.26, p < .01. Figure 2 illustrates the interaction effect that is in line
with H3.
   Fourth, to test the complete moderated mediation model, we used a
formal test that quantifies the relationship between the proposed moder-
ator and the size of the indirect effect to determine whether the indirect
effect depends on the moderator (Hayes, 2015). When testing the paths
of the complete model simultaneously, H1, H2, and H3 remain sup-
ported (see Table 2). Furthermore, the index of moderated mediation is
positive and the confidence interval does not include zero (x ¼ .06; CI
¼ .01 to .14), which provides support for H4. The conclusion is that the
indirect effect of perceived age diversity on individual learning outcomes
through knowledge sharing is positively moderated by psychological
safety. Figure 3 illustrates our complete model.
   An analysis of the moderator’s effects at different values reveals a non-
significant result (0.03) under conditions of high psychological safety
(CI ¼ .12 to .05; see Table 3). In contrast, when psychological safety
was low, perceived age diversity was negatively linked (0.16) to know-
ledge sharing (CI ¼ .28 to .06, see Table 3).

16         F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


Table 2. Unstandardized OLS regression coefficients (standard errors in parentheses) with
confidence intervals (CI).
                                Knowledge sharing (M)                          Learning outcomes (Y)
                            Coeff.                     95% CI             Coeff.                 95% CI
Perceived age           0.65 (0.24)               1.12, 0.18     0.25 (0.07)           0.38, 0.11
   diversity (X)
Knowledge                                                             0.62 (0.06)            0.51, 0.74
   Sharing (M)
Psychological            0.55 (0.12)               0.30, 0.79
   safety (W)
XxW                     0.10 (0.05)            0.01, 0.20
Constant              2.75 (0.64)            1.49, 4.00            2.45 (0.38)           1.71, 3.19
                         R ¼ 0.62; F(3, 206) ¼ 114.36
                          2
                                                                        R2 ¼ 0.47; F(2, 207) ¼ 90.26
Notes. N ¼ 210; p < .001; p < .01; p < .05.


              Psychological        .55***                 Knowledge
                 safety
                                                           sharing
                  (PS)             .10*

                   PAD x PS                 -.65***                    .62***


                         Perceived age                      -.25**                  Learning
                           diversity
                                                                                    outcomes
                            (PAD)

Figure 3. Moderated mediation model (N ¼ 210). Unstandardized regression weights.
p <.001; p <.01; p <.05.

Table 3. Conditional indirect effects of perceived age diversity on learning outcomes.
                                          Psychological
Mediator                                     safety                   Effect                      95% CI
Knowledge sharing                             3.86                    0.16                    0.28, 0.06
Knowledge Sharing                             4.82                    0.09                    0.17, 0.02
Knowledge Sharing                             5.78                    0.03                    0.12, 0.05
Notes. Values of the moderator psychological safety: Mean ± 1 standard deviation. N ¼ 210.


Discussion
The goal of this study was to assess the role of a training group’s age
diversity composition as an antecedent of participants’ learning outcomes
in interactive training settings. Three main findings ensued from this
study. First, we found a negative link between age diversity as perceived
by the training participants and their evaluations of learning outcomes,
while no such influence existed for objective age diversity. Second, know-
ledge sharing mediated the relationship between participants’ perceived
age diversity of the training group and learning outcomes. Third, we
identified participants’ perceptions of psychological safety as a buffer,
such that the negative relationship between perceived age diversity and
learning outcomes, mediated via knowledge sharing, only existed for
trainees who experienced low levels of psychological safety. Considering
the high financial investments into organizational training programs and

                    THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT   17


the ongoing demographic shifts that influence training groups’ composi-
tions, our research is highly relevant for practitioners who want to
ensure high learning outcomes in interactive training settings.
Furthermore, as we outline next, our findings also have several implica-
tions for the literature on human resource development.

Theoretical implications
First, training research has largely neglected the role of the training
group composition as part of the training design that may affect how
much participants learn in a training (Bell et al., 2017; Roberson, Kulik,
& Pepper, 2001). Thus far, scholars have investigated the training design
as an antecedent of learning outcomes in terms of training methods,
applied learning principles, and provided opportunities for practice. Our
research indicates that this literature should be extended to also include
the training group’s composition as an antecedent when the learning
experience takes place in an interactive setting. Clearly, although the
training group composition may be irrelevant in low interactive training
courses such as individual technology-based learning programs or trad-
itional one-way classroom teaching, there is a trend toward substituting
passive human resource development interventions with interactive train-
ing designs (Bell et al., 2017). Thus, processes such as the one outlined
in this research will continue to gain relevance for employees’ learning
outcomes whenever the knowledge acquisition at least partly involves the
active reflection on existing knowledge to integrate and develop new
knowledge. Such interactive training situations can occur both in high
touch (i.e., face-to-face) as well as low touch (i.e., technology-based)
learning environments, as well as in formal and informal settings
(Gerpott et al., 2017a).
   Our study demonstrates that social identity theory provides a useful
theoretical lens to explain why heterogeneous training groups may trig-
ger self-, other-, and meta-categorizations that inhibit the learning pro-
cess because participants feel at risk to openly engage with the learning
content through sharing their knowledge. That is, we suggest that train-
ing design scholars should explicitly consider social identity-related in-
and outgroup categorization processes that mostly happen implicitly.
Such processes might also be particularly relevant when developing the-
ory on learning in ethnically diverse (rather than age-diverse) training
groups. In such settings, participants’ learning outcomes might also be at
risk as a result of self- and other-categorization processes. Based on the
premises of social identity theory, the cultural diversity of a training
group itself constitutes a promising area for theorizing that shifts the

18    F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


focus from the reactions to cultural diversity training courses (e.g.,
Holladay, & Qui~   nones, 2005) to the composition of these training groups
in order to understand in more depth how much employees learn in
intercultural settings. Similar to participants’ perceptions of age diversity,
perceptions of cultural differences may increase participants’ insecurity
about sharing knowledge, which in turn may result in lower levels
of learning.
   Second, our research provides further evidence for the argument that
differences only make a difference when individuals recognize them
(Hentschel et al., 2013, Shemla et al., 2016). This finding has relevant
implications for the development of conceptual models in the training
and learning literature such that scholars are well advised to not only
focus on objective age differences in the training group composition. At
the least, we suggest that future theorizing needs to be explicit about
why (i.e., through which process) the authors assume that a specific type
of diversity (i.e., objective or perceived) influences outcomes and whether
any differences in the strengths of relationships are expected depending
on the subjective or objective measurement of diversity when testing
their conceptual model. This is particularly relevant in the context of
international human resource management, in which the role of per-
ceived age diversity deserves further conceptual attention (Marcus &
Fritzsche, 2016) because the subjective meanings of perceived age diver-
sity in different cultures may vary and can be overruled by other societal
norms. For example, in contrast to the individualistic German context
studied here, Hutchings and Michailova (2006) interviewed employees in
China and demonstrated that these employees tend to place the in-group
advantage of knowledge sharing before age norms. Accordingly, despite
age differences, they provide more knowledge to co-workers than to
workers outside their company because the subjective meaning of age
diversity seems to be less relevant than the in-group identity (Hutchings
& Michailova, 2006). Theorizing on a training group’s age diversity com-
position may thus benefit from incorporating the role of culture to build
a comprehensive theory of learning in formal organizational train-
ing settings.
   Third, our study extends previous work on learning as a constructivist
process that can be enhanced through knowledge sharing. We contribute
to research that aims to direct more attention to learning as an endeavor
comprising both individual and social aspects (Salomon & Perkins,
1998). Namely, our findings suggest that individual learning processes
are inseparably linked to the training group context in which they take
place. This notion is in line with the definition of learning as an outcome
of an individual’s interaction with the environment rather than as

                     THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT   19


occurring only through introspection (DeSimone & Werner, 2012). It
paves the way for theorizing on other active learning processes that may
influence the effectiveness of training programs conducted with age-
diverse training groups. For example, recent research has shown that in
addition to knowledge sharing behaviors, employees’ knowledge receiving
behaviors constitute a second aspect that ensures successful learning
processes between age-diverse interaction partners (Burmeister
et al., 2018).
   Lastly, our study highlights the relevance of perceived psychological
safety in alleviating the potential backlash of age diversity in training
groups. This finding is particularly interesting in the context of social
identity theory (Tajfel & Turner, 2004) because it shows that the negative
consequences of identity threat through dissimilar group members can
potentially be overcome by instilling the feeling of being able to interact
with others without fear of negative consequences to the self-image. A
theoretical implication of our study is thus that research on the training
design process—which involves choosing the instructional tools and
strategies necessary to support learning and transfer (Salas & Cannon-
Bowers, 2001)—may benefit from shedding more light on the behavioral
strategies of trainers that can help enhance a high psychological safety in
training groups. Similarly to how leadership scholars have defined behav-
ioral building blocks of leadership that can contribute to increasing psy-
chological safety (e.g. inviting followers to share their views, opinions
and inputs, Carmeli, Reiter-Palmon, & Ziv, 2010), training scholars could
develop theory on specific behavioral configurations that can help to
build psychological safety in interactive learning environments through
the trainer. Next, we elaborate on some ideas for practice on how train-
ers could achieve this goal.

Practical implications
We derive two main implications for organizations that wish to improve
training programs in interactive settings with (age-)diverse participant
groups. First, the composition of training groups, and particularly partic-
ipants’ perceptions of them, may be difficult to change and therefore
need to be effectively managed. Our results suggest that training pro-
viders could focus on increasing participants’ perceptions of psycho-
logical safety to effectively manage the learning process. For example,
trainers could begin a training day by establishing the “ground rules”
and creating a positive, trustful atmosphere before delving into the actual
training content (e.g., Rodas-Meeker & Meeker, 2005). Over the course
of the training day, the trainer could regularly hold plenum sessions in

20    F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


which s/he makes sure that everyone is encouraged to share their know-
ledge and point of view (Anthony, 2018; Gerpott et al., 2017b). To
ensure that the trainer can implement these practices, the ability to cre-
ate a safe learning environment should thus be chosen as an important
selection criterion when recruiting trainers. For instance, previous train-
ing participants can be asked to report on a trainer’s capability to sup-
port their open expression of viewpoints and opinions. Alternatively,
objective raters could participate in training sessions to assess a trainer’s
application of behavioral markers that indicate attempts to enhance par-
ticipants’ psychological safety (e.g., inviting participants to share their
views, opinions and inputs, asking open questions and listening atten-
tively). Additionally, on a more general level, perceptions of psycho-
logical safety could be evoked in employees’ daily working lives through
age-inclusive human resource practices that provide equal opportunities
for all age groups and that reduce age discrimination (Boehm, Kunze, &
Bruch, 2014; Rabl & Triana, 2013). Such practices could encourage
employees to participate in training courses in the expectation that their
knowledge and efforts are valued in the training setting (Zacher et al.,
2018) and ensure that despite differences between participants knowledge
is shared in formal and informal learning settings (Anthony, 2018).
   Second, our study underscores the importance of considering the sub-
jective component of diversity because only participants’ perceived age
diversity of the training group (and not its objective age diversity) signifi-
cantly affected individual learning outcomes. Previous research indicates
that positive beliefs about diversity may reduce the tendency to perceive
others as dissimilar (Homan, Greer, Jehn, & Koning, 2010). Thus, one gen-
eral recommendation for human resource management departments is
that initiatives that enhance people’s openness to diversity and reduce their
tendency to perceive others as dissimilar could be beneficial for enhancing
knowledge sharing between interaction partners from different age groups.
For instance, human resource development interventions such as social
events, communities of practice, and intergenerational mentoring initia-
tives could be implemented to increase contact between employees from
different age groups (Ropes, 2013). More opportunities for high quality
intergenerational interactions may reduce age bias (Henry, Zacher, &
Desmette, 2015) and increase the salience of similarities (rather than differ-
ences) for employees (Gerpott et al., 2017b).

Limitations and future research
The design of our study—that is, a data collection via self-reports in the spe-
cific training context of one automotive company in a cross-sectional

                    THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT   21


setting—has a number of limitations that can inspire future research.
Specifically, scholars may be interested to test our model (1) using alterna-
tive measurement instruments, (2) focusing on different aspects of diversity,
and (3) investigating training programs with varying degrees of complexity.
   First, we measured the variables of interest using self-reports, which
bears the risk of common method bias or social desirable responses (i.e.,
reporting behavior as more positive than it actually is). However, a mod-
erated mediation effect as identified in the present study is unlikely the
result of an intended response pattern. If participants replied in a way
they considered favorable to our research aim, this would indeed have
increased the correlations between our constructs but also severely
deflated the interaction effect, thereby increasing the difficulty of detect-
ing it by statistical means (Siemsen, Roth, & Oliveria, 2010). Thus, we
consider common method bias as less of a concern (see also Fuller,
Simmering, Atinc, Atinc, & Babin, 2016; Gerpott, Van Quaquebeke,
Schlamp, & Voelpel, 2019). Nevertheless, future research could test the
hypothesized relationships using objective measures of learning out-
comes—such as the number of submitted ideas for improvement in the
corporate idea management system or supervisor ratings of learning in
daily work life—to gain insights into distal training transfer outcomes.
Furthermore, studies could replicate the findings using a different meas-
ure of perceived age diversity. Whereas our face-valid measurement of
diversity perceptions (i.e., directly asking participants how age diverse
they perceived the group to be) is intuitively appealing and well-estab-
lished in the literature (Harrison et al., 1998), scholars could also assess
training groups’ perceived age diversity with a more indirect, multi-item
measurement approach s (e.g., Hentschel et al., 2013). Such an approach
could tap into the training group’s underlying stereotypical perceptions.
   Second, it is conceivable that other diversity aspects that were not sali-
ent in our sample are important in different organizational settings. In
addition to studying culturally diverse training groups (as discussed in
the theoretical implications section) or gender-diverse teams, it could
also be interesting to investigate training groups’ deep-level diversity
characteristics, which describe less visible attributes such as personality
traits, values, and functional background. Previous research argues that
diverse groups, in terms of deep-level attributes, are more likely to pos-
sess a wide range of different work-related knowledge that is unrelated
to the threats of participants’ social identity (Harrison et al., 1998). As
such, deep-level diversity attributes may generally have a positive effect
on training group processes and learning outcomes.
   Third, this study was conducted in a formal training setting in which
participants learned the principles of continuous improvement by

22      F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


actively engaging in the training task and in discussions with each other.
In such settings, sharing one’s knowledge is essential for the progress of
the training. In contrast, the role of age diversity and knowledge sharing
may be less relevant for learning outcomes in low interactive training
settings in which participants simply need to listen to the instructor, the
training content is less complex, training group participants largely pos-
sess the same knowledge, or the training is conducted using techno-
logical tools in an individual setting. In such low-interaction training
contexts, learning takes place independent from knowledge sharing
interactions with others, which entails that the training group compos-
ition can be disregarded when explaining learning outcomes.
Furthermore, even when considering an interactive training setting, it is
possible that knowledge sharing is not always positive. For example,
training participants may share knowledge that is irrelevant or wrong,
thereby consuming valuable training time and spreading incorrect infor-
mation. We thus consider it a worthy endeavor for future research to
also explore the potential dark sides of knowledge sharing in interactive
training settings.


Conclusion
In the context of the substantial societal demographic shifts currently
taking place in Western industrialized countries, this research is a call
for managing the diversity of training groups rather than only managing
training groups on diversity management. Taking a first step in this dir-
ection, we drew from social identity theory to provide preliminary
insights into the mechanisms and effects of perceived age diversity on
participants’ evaluations of their learning outcomes in a training setting.
Our work provides impetus to the notion that more research is needed
on active learning strategies to better understand how and when design
elements such as training groups’ diversity composition affects learning
outcomes (Bell et al., 2017). In this regard, we hope that our study
encourages future work on the potentials and pitfalls of diversity in the
context of human resource development.

Note
 1.   We also tested a multilevel moderated mediation model, as trainees in the same
      training session shared the same instructor and contextual conditions. Namely, the
      training group identifier was entered as a cluster variable using MLmed for SPSS
      (Rockwood & Hayes, 2017). This analysis revealed the same result patterns and so
      we report the more parsimonious model.

                        THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT          23


Acknowledgements
An earlier, abridged version of this article was included in the Academy of Management
Best Paper Proceedings 2015.


Funding
This research project was supported by the WDN – WISE Demographic Network, which
is gratefully acknowledged.


Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors


References
Anthony, C. (2018). To question or accept? How status differences influence responses
  to new epistemic technologies in knowledge work. Academy of Management Review,
  43(4), 661–679. doi:10.5465/amr.2016.0334
Arib, M. A., & Hess, M. B. (1986). The construction of reality. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.
Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. Academy
  of Management Review, 14(1), 20–39. doi:10.2307/258189
ATD (2016). ATD releases 2016 state of the industry report. Retrieved from https://
  www.td.org/insights/atd-releases-2016-state-of-the-industry-report
Bausch, S., Michel, A., & Sonntag, K. (2014). How gender influences the effect of age on
  self-efficacy and training success. International Journal of Training and Development,
  18(3), 171–187. doi:10.1111/ijtd.12027
Bell, B. S., Tannenbaum, S. I., Ford, J. K., Noe, R. A., & Kraiger, K. (2017). 100 years of
  training and development research: What we know and where we should go. Journal
  of Applied Psychology, 102(3), 305–323. doi:10.1037/apl0000142
Boehm, S. A., Kunze, F., & Bruch, H. (2014). Spotlight on age-diversity climate: The
  impact of age-inclusive HR practices on firm-level outcomes. Personnel Psychology,
  67, 667–704. doi:10.1111/peps.12047
Burmeister, A., Fasbender, U., & Deller, J. (2018). Being perceived as a knowledge
  sender or knowledge receiver: A multistudy investigation of the effect of age on
  knowledge transfer. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 91(3),
  518. Published online before print, doi:10.1111/joop.12208
Carmeli, A., Reiter-Palmon, R., & Ziv, E. (2010). Inclusive leadership and employee
  involvement in creative tasks in the workplace: The mediating role of psychological
  safety. Creativity Research Journal, 22(3), 250–260. doi:10.1080/10400419.2010.504654
Cennamo, L., & Gardner, D. (2008). Generational differences in work values, outcomes
  and person-organisation values fit. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 23(8), 891–906.
  doi:10.1109/EMR.2011.5876170
Cerasoli, C. P., Alliger, G. M., Donsbach, J. S., Mathieu, J. E., Tannenbaum, S. I., &
  Orvis, K. A. (2018). Antecedents and outcomes of informal learning behaviors: A
  meta-analysis. Journal of Business and Psychology, 33, (2), 203–233. doi:10.1007/
  s10869-017-9492-y

24     F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


Connelly, C. E., & Kelloway, K. E. (2003). Predictors of employees’ perceptions of know-
   ledge sharing cultures. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 24(5),
   294–301. doi:10.1108/01437730310485815
Conway, J. M., & Lance, C. E. (2010). What reviewers should expect from authors
   regarding common method bias in organizational research. Journal of Business and
   Psychology, 25, 325–334. doi:10.1007/s10869-010-9181-6
DeSimone, R. L., & Werner, J. M. (2012). Human resource development (6th ed.).
   Mason, OH: Southwestern.
Drabe, D., Hauff, S., & Richter, N. F. (2015). Job satisfaction in aging workforces: An
   analysis of the USA, Japan and Germany. International Journal of Human Resource
   Management, 26(6), 783–805. doi:10.1080/09585192.2014.939101
Dudley-Marling, C. (2012). Social construction of learning. In N. M. Seel (Eds.),
   Encyclopedia of the sciences of learning. Boston, MA: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-
   4419-1428-6_96
Edmondson, A. C. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams.
   Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(2), 350–383. doi:10.2307/2666999
Edmondson, A. C. (2002). Managing the risk of learning: Psychological safety in work
   teams. In M. West (Ed.), International handbook of organizational teamwork (pp.
   255–275). London: Blackwell Publishing.
Edmondson, A. C., & Lei, Z. (2014). Psychological safety: The history, renaissance, and
   future of an interpersonal construct. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and
   Organizational Behavior, 1, (1), 23–43. doi:10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-031413-091305
Ellwart, T., B€undgens, S., & Rack, O. (2013). Managing knowledge exchange and identi-
   fication in age diverse teams. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 28(7/8), 950–972. doi:
   10.1108/JMP-06-2013-0181
Faraj, S., & Lee, S. (2000). Coordinating expertise in software development teams.
   Management Science, 46, (12), 1554–1568. doi:10.1287/mnsc.46.12.1554.12072
Finkelstein, L. M., King, E. B., & Voyles, E. C. (2015). Age metastereotyping and cross-
   age workplace interactions: A meta view of age stereotypes at work. Work, Aging and
   Retirement, 1, (1), 26–40. doi:10.1093/workar/wau002
Fuller, C. M., Simmering, M. J., Atinc, G., Atinc, Y., & Babin, B. J. (2016). Common
   methods variance detection in business research. Journal of Business Research, 69(8),
   3192–3198. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.12.008
German Economic Institute. (2017). Die Neunte IW-Weiterbildungserhebung [the 9th
   IW-Study on Training and Development], 44, IW Trends 4/2017. Retrieved from
   https://www.iwkoeln.de/fileadmin/publikationen/2017/369145/IW-Trends_2017-04_
   Seyda_Placke.pdf
Gerpott, F. H., Fasbender, U., & Burmeister, A. (in press). Respectful leadership and fol-
   lowers’ knowledge sharing: A social mindfulness lens. Human Relations,
   001872671984481. Published online before print, doi:10.1177/0018726719844813
Gerpott, F. H., Lehmann-Willenbrock, N., & Voelpel, S. (2017a). Intergenerational learn-
   ing in organizations: A framework and discussion of opportunities. In R. Burke, C.
   Cooper, & A. S. Antoniou (Eds.), The aging workforce: Individual, organizational and
   societal challenges (pp. 241–267). Bingley: Emerald Publishing.
Gerpott, F. H., Lehmann-Willenbrock, N., & Voelpel, S. C. (2017b). A phase model of
   intergenerational learning in organizations. Academy of Management Learning &
   Education, 16, 193–216. doi:10.5465/amle.2015.0185
Gerpott, F. H., Van Quaquebeke, N., Schlamp, S., & Voelpel, S. C. (2019). An identity
   perspective on ethical leadership to explain organizational citizenship behavior (OCB):

                          THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT               25


   The interplay of follower moral identity and leader group prototypicality. Journal of
   Business Ethics, 1063–1078. doi:10.1007/s10551-017-3625-0
Handley, K., Sturdy, A., Fincham, R., & Clark, T. (2006). Within and beyond commun-
   ities of practice: Making sense of learning through participation, identity and practice.
   Journal of Management Studies, 43(3), 641–653. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2006.00605.x
Harrison, D., A., Price, K., H., & Bell, M. P. (1998). Beyond relational demography:
   Time and the effects of surface- and deep-level diversity on work group cohesion.
   Academy of Management Journal, 41, 96–107. doi:10.2307/256901
Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process ana-
   lysis: A regression-based approach. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Hayes, A. F. (2015). An index and test of linear moderated mediation. Multivariate
   Behavioral Research, 50(1), 1–22. doi:10.1080/00273171.2014.96268
Henry, H., Zacher, H., & Desmette, D. (2015). Reducing age bias and turnover inten-
   tions by enhancing intergenerational contact quality in the workplace: The role of
   opportunities for generativity and development. Work, Aging and Retirement, 1, (3),
   243–253. doi:10.1093/workar/wav005
Hentschel, T., Shemla, M., Wegge, J., & Kearney, E. (2013). Perceived diversity and team
   functioning: The role of diversity beliefs and affect. Small Group Research, 44(1),
   33–61. doi:10.1177/1046496412470725
Holladay, C. L., & Qui~nones, M. A. (2005). Reactions to diversity training: An international com-
   parison. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 16(4), 529–545. doi:10.1002/hrdq.1154
Homan, A. C., Greer, L. L., Jehn, K. A., & Koning, L. (2010). Believing shapes seeing:
   The impact of diversity beliefs on the construal of group composition. Group
   Processes & Intergroup Relations, 13, 477–493. doi:10.1177/1368430209350747
Hox, J. J. (2010). Multilevel analysis. New York: Routledge.
Husted, K., & Michailova, S. (2002). Diagnosing and fighting knowledge-sharing hostil-
   ity. Organizational Dynamics, 31(1), 60–73.
Hutchings, K., & Michailova, S. (2006). The impact of group membership on knowledge
   sharing in Russia and China. International Journal of Emerging Markets, 1, (1), 21–34.
   doi:10.1108/17468800610644988
Joshi, K., Sarker, S., & Sarker, S. (2007). Knowledge transfer within information systems
   development teams: Examining the role of knowledge source attributes. Decision
   Support Systems, 43(2), 322–335. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2006.10.003
Kahn, W. A. (1990). Psychological conditions of personal engagement and disengage-
   ment at work. Academy of Management Journal, 33, 692–724. doi:10.2307/256287
Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P. L. (1989). Motivation and cognitive abilities: An integrative/
   aptitude-treatment interaction approach to skill acquisition. Journal of Applied
   Psychology, 74, (4), 657–690. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.74.4.657
King, E. B., Kaplan, S., & Zaccaro, S. (2008). Metaperceptions in diverse workgroups:
   Intrapersonal perspectives and intragroup processes. In B. Mannix, M. Neale, & C.
   Anderson (Eds.), Research on managing groups and teams (pp. 109–142). Oxford: Elsevier.
Kostopoulos, K. C., & Bozionelos, N. (2011). Team exploratory and exploitative learning:
   Psychological safety, task conflict, and team performance. Group & Organization
   Management, 36, 385–415. doi:10.1177/1059601111405985
Kulik, C. T., Ryan, S., Harper, S., & George, G. (2014). Aging populations and manage-
   ment. Academy of Management Journal, 57(4), 929–935. doi:10.5465/amj.2014.4004
Macky, K., Gardner, D., & Forsyth, S. (2008). Generational differences at work:
   Introduction and overview. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 23(8), 857–861. doi:10.
   1108/02683940810904358

26      F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


Magni, M., Paolino, C., Cappetta, R., & Proserpio, L. (2013). Diving too deep: How cog-
   nitive absorption and group learning behavior affect individual learning. Academy of
   Management Learning & Education, 12, 51–69. doi:10.5465/amle.2011.0096
Marcus, J., & Fritzsche, B. A. (2016). The cultural anchors of age discrimination in the
   workplace: A multilevel framework. Work, Aging and Retirement, 2, (2), 217–229. doi:
   10.1093/workar/waw007
Muller, D., Judd, C. M., & Yzerbyt, V. Y. (2005). When mediation is moderated and
   moderation is mediated. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, (6), 852–863.
   doi:10.1037/0022-3514.89.6.852
Muthen, L. K., & Muthen, B. O. (2012). Mplus User’s Guide. (7th ed.) Los Angeles, CA:
   Muthen & Muthen.
Nassar, M. R., Bruckner, R., Gold, J. I., Li, S. C., Heekeren, H. R., & Eppinger, B. (2016).
   Age differences in learning emerge from an insufficient representation of uncertainty in
   older adults. Nature Communications, 7(1), 11609. doi:10.1038/ncomms11609
Nilsen, L. L., & Ludvigsen, S. R. (2010). Collaborative work and medical talk:
   Opportunities for learning through knowledge sharing. Communication & Medicine,
   7, 143–153. doi:10.1558/cam.v7i2.143
Parker, S. K. (2014). Beyond motivation: Job and work design for development, health,
   ambidexterity, and more. Annual Review of Psychology, 65(1), 661–691. doi:10.1146/
   annurev-psych-010213-115208
Polzer, J. T., Milton, L. P., & Swann, W. B. Jr., (2002). Capitalizing on diversity:
   Interpersonal congruence in small work groups. Administrative Science Quarterly,
   47(2), 296–324. doi:10.2307/3094807
Preacher, K. J., Rucker, D. D., & Hayes, A. F. (2007). Addressing moderated mediation
   hypotheses: Theory, methods, and prescriptions. Multivariate Behavioral Research,
   42(1), 185–227. doi:10.1080/00273170701341316
Rabl, T., & Triana, M. (2013). How German employees of different ages conserve
   resources: Perceived age discrimination and affective organizational commitment.
   International Journal of Human Resource Management, 24(19), 3599–3612. doi:10.
   1080/09585192.2013.777936
Roberson, L., Kulik, C. T., & Pepper, M. B. (2001). Designing effective diversity training:
   Influence of group composition and trainee experience. Journal of Organizational
   Behavior, 22(8), 871–885. doi:10.1002/job.117
Rockwood, N. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2017). May). MLmed: An SPSS macro for multilevel
   mediation and conditional process analysis. Poster presented at the Annual Meeting of
   the Association of Psychological Science (APS), Boston, MA.
Rodas-Meeker, M., & Meeker, L. (2005). Building trust: The great enabler. In S.
   Schuman (Ed.), The IAF handbook of group facilitation: Best practices from the leading
   organization in facilitation (pp. 89–101). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Ropes, D. (2013). Intergenerational learning in organizations. European Journal of
   Training and Development, 37(8), 713–727. doi:10.1108/EJTD-11-2012-0081
Roussin, C., & Webber, S. (2012). Impact of organizational identification and psycho-
   logical safety on initial perceptions of coworker trustworthiness. Journal of Business
   and Psychology, 27, 317–329. doi:10.1007/s10869-011-9245-2
Ryan, K. M., King, E. B., & Finkelstein, L. M. (2015). Younger workers’ metastereotypes,
   workplace mood, attitudes, and behaviors. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 30(1),
   54–70. doi:10.1108/JMP-07-2014-0215
Salas, E., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (2001). The science of training: A decade of progress.
   Annual Review of Psychology, 52, (1), 471–499. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.471

                         THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT          27


Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1998). Individual and social aspects of learning. Review
   of Research in Education, 23, 1–24. doi:10.2307/1167286
Shally, C. E., Gilson, L. L., & Blum, T. C. (2009). Interactive effects of growth need
   strength, work context, and job complexity on self-reported creative performance.
   Academy of Management Journal, 52, 489–505. doi:10.5465/amj.2009.41330806
Shemla, M., & Meyer, B. (2012). Bridging diversity in organizations and cross-cultural
   work psychology by studying perceived differences. Industrial and Organizational
   Psychology, 5(3), 370–372. doi:10.1111/j.1754-9434.2012.01464.x
Shemla, M., Meyer, B., Greer, L., & Jehn, K. A. (2016). A review of perceived diversity
   in teams: Does how members perceive their team’s composition affect team processes
   and outcomes? Journal of Organizational Behavior, 37, S89–S106. doi:10.1002/job.1957
Siemsen, E., Roth, A. V., Balasubramanian, S., & Anand, G. (2009). The influence of psycho-
   logical safety and confidence in knowledge on employee knowledge sharing. Manufacturing
   & Service Operations Management, 11, 429–447. doi:10.1287/msom.1080.0233
Siemsen, E., Roth, A., & Oliveira, P. (2010). Common method bias in regression models
   with linear, quadratic, and interaction effects. Organizational Research Methods, 13(3),
   456–476. doi:10.1177/1094428109351241
Sitzmann, T., & Weinhardt, J. M. (2018). Training engagement theory: A multilevel per-
   spective on the effectiveness of work-related training. Journal of Management, 44(2),
   732–756. doi:10.1177/0149206315574596
Spector, P. E., & Brannick, M. T. (2011). Methodological urban legends: The misuse of
   statistical control variables. Organizational Research Methods, 14(2), 287–305. doi:10.
   1177/1094428110369842
Streb, C. K., Voelpel, S. C., & Leibold, M. (2009). Aging workforce management in the
   automobile industry: Defining the concept and its constituting elements. German
   Journal of Research in Human Resource Management, 23(1), 8–27. doi:10.1688/1862-
   0000_ZfP_2009_01_Streb
Sveiby, K. E., & Simons, R. (2002). Collaborative climate and effectiveness of knowledge
   work – An empirical study. Journal of Knowledge Management, 6, (5), 420–433. doi:
   10.1108/13673270210450388
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (2004). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In
   J. T. Host & J. Sidanius (Eds.), Key readings in social psychology. Political psychology:
   Key readings (pp. 276–293). New York: Psychology Press.
Tempest, S. (2003). Intergenerational learning: A reciprocal knowledge development pro-
   cess that challenges the language of learning. Management Learning, 34, (2), 181–200.
   doi:10.1177/1350507603034002002
Vance, C. M., Boje, D. M., Mendenhall, M. E., & Kropp, H. R. (1991). A taxonomy of
   individual learning benefits from external knowledge-sharing meetings. Human
   Resource Development Quarterly, 2(1), 37–52. doi:10.1002/hrdq.3920020107
Van Ginkel, W. P., & Van Knippenberg, D. (2008). Group information elaboration and
   group decision making: The role of shared task representations. Organizational Behavior
   and Human Decision Processes, 105(1), 82–97. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2007.08.005
Van Knippenberg, D., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Homan, A. C. (2004). Work group diver-
   sity and group performance: An integrated review and research agenda. Journal of
   Applied Psychology, 89, (6), 1008–1022. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.89.6.1008
Wolfson, N. E., Cavanagh, T. M., & Kraiger, K. (2014). Older adults and technology-
   based instruction: Optimizing learning outcomes and transfer. Academy of
   Management Learning & Education, 13, 26–44. doi:10.5465/amle.2012.0056

28        F. H. GERPOTT ET AL.


Ye, S., Chen, H., & Jin, X. (2006). An empirical study of what drives users to share
  knowledge in virtual communities. In J. Lang, F. Lin, J. Wang (Eds.), Knowledge sci-
  ence, engineering and management. KSEM 2006. Lecture Notes in Computer Science
  (pp. 563–575). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. doi:10.1007/11811220_48
Yeo, R. K., & Gold, J. (2011). The inseparability of action and learning: Unravelling
  Revans’ action learning theory for Human Resource Development (HRD). Human
  Resource Development International, 14(5), 511–526. doi:10.1080/13678868.2011.
  604956
Zacher, H., Kooij, D. T. A. M., & Beier, M. E. (2018). Active aging at work:
  Contributing factors and implications for organizations. Organizational Dynamics,
  47(1), 37–45. doi:10.1016/j.orgdyn.2017.08.001
Zellmer-Bruhn, M. E., Maloney, M. M., Bhappu, A. D., & Salvador, R. (2008). When
  and how do differences matter? An exploration of perceived similarity in teams.
  Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes, 107, 41–59. doi:10.1016/j.
  obhdp.2008.01


Appendix

Table A1. Results of the moderated mediation analysis with objective age diversity as the
independent variable.
                              Knowledge sharing (M)                          Learning outcomes (Y)
                                 Coeff.             95% CI                       Coeff.              95% CI
Objective age                  0.56 (0.69)       0.92, 2.04                  0.04 (0.03)        0.11, 0.03
   diversity (X)
Knowledge                                                                    0.93 (0.18)        0.54, 1.32
   sharing (M)
Psychological                  1.85 (1.09)       0.48, 4.19
   safety (W)
XxW                           0.12 (0.15)        0.44, 0.19
Constant                      3.58 (5.08)       14.48, 7.32                   0.62 (0.98)        1.48, 2.71
                          R ¼ 0.71; F(3, 14) ¼ 11.35
                          2
                                                                          R2 ¼ 0.66; F(2, 15) ¼ 14.50
Notes. N ¼ 18 training groups; p < .001; p < .01; p < .05. Unstandardized OLS regression coefficients
(standard errors in parentheses) with confidence intervals (CI). Index of moderated mediation: x ¼ 0.12; CI
¼ 0.42 to 0.19.


Table A2. Results of the moderated mediation analysis with control variables.
                           Knowledge sharing (M)                             Learning outcomes (Y)
                             Coeff.             95% CI                         Coeff.             95% CI
Perceived age            0.67 (0.24)      1.14, 0.19                 0.31 (0.07)      0.45, 0.17
   diversity (X)
Knowledge                                                                  0.62 (0.06)        0.51, 0.73
   Sharing (M)
Psychological            0.54 (0.13)        0.29, 0.78
   safety (W)
XxW                       0.11 (0.05)        0.01, 0.20
Age                        0.00 (0.00)       0.01, 0.01                 0.01 (0.01)      0.03, 0.00
Gender                    0.10 (0.12)       0.34, 0.14                 0.22 (0.15)        0.51, 0.08
Job position                0.06 (0.14)      0.21, 0.34                  0.30 (0.17)        0.03, 0.64
Constant                 2.69 (0.72)       1.27, 4.12                  2.74 (0.61)         1.55, 3.94
                      R2 ¼ 0.63 F(6, 203) ¼ 56.94                  R2 ¼ 0.49 F(5, 204) ¼ 39.76
Notes. N ¼ 210; 0 ¼ manager, 1 ¼ worker; 0 ¼ female, 1 ¼ male. p < .001; p < .01; p < .05.
Unstandardized OLS regression coefficients (standard errors in parentheses) with confidence intervals (CI).
Index of moderated mediation: x ¼ 0.07; CI ¼ 0.01 to 0.14.

