See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/251192207



Examining organizational learning in schools: The role of psychological
safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning

Article in Journal of Educational Change · February 2012
DOI: 10.1007/s10833-011-9167-9



CITATIONS                                                                                              READS

85                                                                                                     825

4 authors, including:

            Monica Higgins                                                                                        Ann Ishimaru
            Harvard University                                                                                    University of Washington Seattle
            35 PUBLICATIONS 5,380 CITATIONS                                                                       11 PUBLICATIONS 795 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE                                                                                          SEE PROFILE



            Rebecca Holcombe
            State of Vermont
            2 PUBLICATIONS 954 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE




Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:



              Improving practice View project



              Family Leadership Design Collaborative View project




 All content following this page was uploaded by Ann Ishimaru on 16 July 2015.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

J Educ Change
DOI 10.1007/s10833-011-9167-9




Examining organizational learning in schools: The role
of psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership
that reinforces learning

Monica Higgins • Ann Ishimaru •
Rebecca Holcombe • Amy Fowler




 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2011



Abstract This study draws upon theory and methods from the field of organiza-
tional behavior to examine organizational learning (OL) in the context of a large
urban US school district. We build upon prior literature on OL from the field of
organizational behavior to introduce and validate three subscales that assess key
dimensions of organizational learning that build upon and extend prior education
research: psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces
learning. Data from 941 teachers across 60 schools in this urban district suggest
that organizational learning is an underlying condition which is expressed by tea-
cher perceptions of subfactors of psychological safety, experimentation, and lead-
ership that reinforces learning. Implications for adopting the conceptual framework
and methods employed in this research for studying organizational learning and
school change are discussed.

Keywords Organizational learning  Psychological safety  Experimentation 
Leadership  School change  Teacher perceptions  Confirmatory factor analysis


Introduction

In response to the No Child Left Behind Act, many schools focused their efforts on
implementing new programs to help them reach performance goals outlined by their
states’ accountability systems. And yet, these efforts have not yielded the results
reformers anticipated (Giles and Hargreaves 2006). As scholars and practitioners
now agree, new initiatives and structures alone are unlikely to lead to lasting
change. Rather, sustainable change in schools is a function of the beliefs, norms, and
expectations of those working within those schools, as well as their capacity for

M. Higgins (&)  A. Ishimaru  R. Holcombe  A. Fowler
Harvard Graduate School of Education, Appian Way, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
e-mail: higginmo@gse.harvard.edu


                                                                             123

                                                                          J Educ Change


learning (Elmore 2002). Over and beyond identifying effective curricula or
requiring educators to use data to improve performance, schools must strengthen
their internal capacity to manage change processes in order to reach high levels of
performance. This is a different approach to educational change; it is one that goes
beyond a focus on compliance or support for programmatic change to a focus on
organizational learning and capacity building within schools (Hopkins et al. 1997;
Stoll 2009).
   Unfortunately, many schools still lack what Stoll (1999) has called an ‘‘internal
capacity’’ (p. 506) for learning—the capacity to engage in and sustain all members
of the school community with the shared purpose of improving student learning. As
David Cohen (1990) observed, ‘‘Unfortunately, most schools offer teachers little
room for learning, and little help in managing the problems that learning would
provide’’ (p. 327). This was true a decade ago when the National Commission on
Teaching and America’s Future concluded that in order to realize significant
improvements in student learning, low-performing schools needed to be redesigned
as learning organizations—as organizations capable of supporting the learning of all
members and of continually improving practice (Fullan 1995; Senge 1990). Linda
Darling-Hammond (1996), commenting on the Commission’s report, explained.
  It is now clear that most schools and teachers cannot produce the kind of
  learning demanded by the new reforms—not because they do not want to, but
  because they do not know how, and the systems they work in do not support
  their efforts to do so. (p. 3)
   Understanding how to create school systems that can themselves be ‘‘learning
organizations’’ to improve instruction and enhance student achievement has
remained an elusive phenomenon. As Leithwood et al. (1998) commented,
‘‘Although there are compelling reasons to view schools from an organizational
learning perspective and some powerful theoretical tools to shape such a
perspective, empirical evidence is thin, to say the least’’ (p. 268). Today, the
reviews of organizational learning (OL) theory continue, and the application of
these theories to improve our understanding of the dynamics of district instructional
reform remains of significant interest (e.g., Boyd 2008). Still, scholars conclude that
OL work has become more fragmented and suggest that future research take strides
toward integrating parallel streams of research that have proceeded on this subject
(Knapp 2008). Further, researchers call for more and better empirical research to
understand how the process of capacity building unfolds in schools (Copland and
Knapp 2006; Gallucci 2008).
   This article responds to recent calls to action for research on organizational
learning in education. First, we draw upon research in organizational behavior to
introduce and validate a survey instrument for measuring key aspects of
organizational learning in the context of schools. The instrument was designed by
scholars in the fields of management and organizational behavior. For this study, we
selected a subset of scales to validate building upon recent research about the role of
the sociocultural environment of schools in supporting change (e.g., Bryk et al.
2010; McLaughlin and Talbert 2006). We adapted the subscales for use in schools
based on preliminary, cognitive pretesting and subsequent factor analyses, and offer

123

J Educ Change


the modified scales here as a tool for understanding how, from the perspective of
teachers, organizational learning is manifest at a school site. This study serves the
goal of providing better conceptual integration of prior organizational learning
theories because it draws both on research on cognitive dimensions of organiza-
tional learning (e.g., Argyris and Schon 1996) and sociocultural learning theory
(e.g., Honig 2008).
   We begin with a brief review of the literature on organizational learning and its
linkages to organizational change, and then propose specific areas of opportunity
that remain for education research. In particular, drawing from organizational
behavior research by Garvin et al. (2008), we investigate three elements of their
research outlining dimensions or ‘‘building blocks’’ of organizational learning that
may be especially important elements of a learning environment for teachers in
urban school settings: ‘‘psychological safety’’ (Edmondson 1999, p. 350), exper-
imentation, and leadership that reinforces learning. We use confirmatory factor
analysis (CFA) to validate each of the subscales that sample these constructs and
then test the degree to which they are essential components of the secondary
construct of organizational learning. Specifically, we examine how the constructs of
psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning are
related to organizational learning in schools and explore the implications of these
relationships for both future educational research and practice.


Background and theory

Numerous excellent reviews exist on the topic of organizational learning as it
applies to schools and school systems (see, for example, Cousins 1996; Leithwood
and Aitken 1995; Leithwood et al. 1998; and the issue dedicated to organizational
learning in the American Journal of Education, Boyd 2008). Further, recent books
on learning communities (e.g., McLaughlin and Talbert 2006) and school
improvement in large urban districts (e.g., Bryk et al. 2010) provide extensive
reviews of the literature and important updates on related research. In this section,
rather than provide another extensive literature review, we focus our attention on the
OL literature that we believe may be especially useful in the study of education
reform.

Background

Although definitions abound regarding the term ‘‘organizational learning,’’ scholars
generally concur that organizational learning refers to a higher order of collective
learning that extends beyond a single individual; individuals within an organization
thus learn from one another and/or group(s) (see Gallucci 2008).
   The term, ‘‘organizational learning,’’ itself was first introduced by March and
Simon (1958) and later became popular as students and colleagues of March and
Simon plunged into the study of knowledge management. Much of this work
focused on information search, acquisition, integration, and assimilation in
organizations. Knowledge and information, including prior experiences, were

                                                                           123

                                                                           J Educ Change


viewed as resources for organizations (generally in the private sector) that could
help organizations ‘‘learn’’ and develop (Levinthal and March 1993; Levitt and
March 1988). Of particular interest were the rational, information processing or
sense-making cycles that people engage in when they learn (Huber 1991). For
example, extensive research has looked at ‘‘absorptive capacity’’ which refers to an
individual’s or organization’s capacity to recognize the value of new kinds of
information absorbing it into existing habits of minds or ways of organizing (Cohen
and Levinthal 1990). Overall, this has been a largely cognitive perspective on
organizational learning that has aimed to understand how people think about
complex problems, solve them, and in addition, avoid errors (e.g., Argyris and
Schon 1996).
   In contrast to this cognitive stream of research on organizational learning,
another stream of research has proceeded in parallel which has been referred to by
some as sociocultural learning theory (e.g., Honig 2008). This OL research stream
has focused on individuals’ social interactions within organizations (e.g., Vygotsky
1978). From this vantage point, people learn primarily through the socially
embedded activities, behaviors, and practices that they engage in (Wertsch 1996).
Thus, rather than study how people cognitively do or do not process information
effectively, scholars in this tradition focus specifically on how social practices shape
individuals’ learning. For example, research in this stream has studied how people
or organizations assist others in learning (e.g., Cole and Wertsch 1996) and how
communities of practice or learning communities emerge and evolve (e.g., Stein and
Coburn 2008). Overall, the emphasis in this stream of work has been on the social
processes of learning in organizations (see Knapp 2008, for a review).
   Recently, these two OL research streams have come closer together in
perspective. As Honig (2008) describes, the New Institutional Sociologists have
built upon early cognitive scientific approaches to studying organizational learning
by examining how social and cultural contexts influence individuals’ searches for
information and sense-making (e.g., Van de Ven and Polley 1992; see Honig 2008,
for a review). However, despite this convergence, educational scholars who study
organizational learning continue to call for further integration between these two
perspectives (e.g., Knapp 2008). In the particular context of schools and school
change, scholars point out that negotiation and internal conflict are part and parcel
of growth and learning in schools; therefore in-depth examinations of teacher
behaviors and practices are essential to understanding organizational learning (e.g.,
Gallucci 2008; Hubbard et al. 2006). At the same time, education scholars have
written extensively about the merits of effective data gathering and analyses on the
part of teachers in order to effect change in schools and school systems (e.g.,
Boudett et al. 2005) suggesting that the cognitive perspective on OL is also
valuable. Thus, these recent streams of research also emphasize the need for a more
integrative approach to understanding OL in schools.

An integrative stance

We concur with recent educational scholars’ assessments of the bifurcation in the
organization learning literature and the merits of considering information related

123

J Educ Change


processes along with more social related practices that individuals engage in at
work. Interestingly, at precisely the same time that this call for integration has come
in the education literature (e.g., Knapp 2008), literature in the adjacent field of
organizational behavior proposed a theoretical model that takes into consideration
both of these approaches. This framework, proposed by Garvin, Edmondson, and
Gino in 2008, suggests that in order to understand organizational learning, we need
to consider several ‘‘building blocks’’ (p. 2): (1) a ‘‘supportive learning environ-
ment’’ (one in which individuals feel psychologically safe, value differences, are
open to new ideas, and have time for reflection; p. 3); (2) ‘‘concrete learning
processes and practices’’ (including the creation, collection, and transfer of
information, experimentation, and analyses; p. 3); and (3) ‘‘leadership that
reinforces learning’’ (including leader behaviors such as listening attentively and
encouraging multiple points of view; p. 4). These building blocks were developed
based upon organizational research and described as ‘‘essential for organizational
learning and adaptability’’ (Garvin et al. 2008, p. 2).
   Garvin et al. (2008) introduced this OL framework in a practitioner journal for
management scholars, but the full model has not yet been tested. In their recent
article, Garvin and colleagues proposed a series of questions associated with each
building block designed for use in both the private and public sectors to measure the
extent to which employees report that an organization—and units within an
organization—possess the conditions the authors feel are necessary for organiza-
tional learning. The hypothesized model by Garvin et al. (2008) incorporates both
cognitive and sociocultural dimensions of organizational learning.
   Garvin, Edmondson, and Gino’s model echoes some of the recent research on OL
in education. For example, their approach aligns with the work of Peter Senge
(1990) in schools, which—similar to his work on private sector organizations—has
emphasized systems thinking, shared vision, and understanding interdependency
and change. Similarly, work on professional learning communities (PLCs) in
schools identifies characteristics of successful PLCs that include facilitative
leadership, participative decision making, shared vision and commitment, and
collaborative activity (Giles and Hargreaves 2006; Hord 1997; Imants 2003; Louis
et al. 1996; Marks and Louis 1999; Stoll et al. 2006). Recent research on teacher
learning communities in particular stresses the interdependence of teacher’s work
and the importance of school culture to adult and student learning (e.g., McLaughlin
and Talbert 2006). Garvin and colleagues’ model also mirrors education research
that takes a more cognitive approach and emphasizes management and information
processes (e.g., Honig 2004). Thus, in many respects, this instrument integrates both
OL research streams as called for by recent education research.
   In addition, Garvin and colleagues’ model attempts to refine our understanding of
organizational climate as a key factor in promoting learning and change. In
particular, they suggest ways in which their proposed building blocks influence the
organization’s ‘‘learning environment’’ (Garvin et al. 2008, p. 5). Psychological
safety, an aspect of the learning environment of an organization, describes the
comfort of teachers in speaking up and asking questions which are key
organizational dynamics within which collective learning takes place (Edmondson
1999). This added dimension has the potential to build upon research in education

                                                                            123

                                                                         J Educ Change


showing that open and reflective dialogue among teachers is central to building
effective professional learning communities in schools (Bryk et al. 1999).
   Garvin and colleagues’ attention to social factors, or conditions for learning,
mirrors education literature on the social factors that shape teaching and learning,
such as politics and values, that make up the social realities of teachers’ work
(McLaughlin et al. 1990). Research in urban school contexts has examined specific
relationships between social trust within a school, professional community, and a
school’s capacity for innovation and experimentation (Bryk et al. 1999, 2010). For
example, Silins et al. (2002), drawing on Australian data from their Organisational
Learning and Leadership Questionnaire, found that having a trusting and
collaborative climate within a school positively impacted student outcomes such
as engagement and participation in school. Goh et al. (2006) extended this work
using the Goh and Richards (1997) Organizational Learning Survey to investigate
whether schools tend to examine previous mistakes and errors as part of their
process of crafting strategic responses to the challenges of school improvement.
Their findings suggest that only good news tends to be shared in schools, and in fact,
some school cultures do not uniformly support constructive criticism or challenges
to past practice. Bryk and Schneider (2003) note that open and honest conversations
among colleagues about what does and does not work requires high levels of
relational trust and a sense of safety for teachers to expose their vulnerabilities in
front of each other.
   In the current study, we extend this recent education research by bringing in key
aspects of Garvin et al. (2008) model to assess the organizational learning climate,
processes, and leadership in schools. In particular, we investigate and apply one
subscale in each of the three building blocks in Garvin and colleagues’ model:
‘‘psychological safety,’’ ‘‘experimentation,’’ and ‘‘leadership that reinforces learn-
ing’’ (p. 5).

Psychological safety (PS)

Over the past decade, organizational behavior scholars such as Edmondson have
found that certain learning conditions such as ‘‘psychological safety,’’ the feeling
that one can safely speak up and ask for help, are associated with important
organizational outcomes such as decreased numbers of errors and improved
organizational systems and processes indicative of organization level learning
(Edmondson 1999, 2003). Edmondson suggests that when work teams promote
psychological safety by, for example, encouraging employees to ask questions or
treat mistakes as opportunities for learning, employees are more likely to take the
kinds of risks associated with breakthroughs or game-changing innovations in
practice (Edmondson 1999).
    Although related concepts have been studied in schools and districts, the
literature would be strengthened by examining teachers’ perceptions of psycholog-
ical safety which may be tied to a school organization’s ability to engage all
members in purposeful, sustained learning to improve practice. For instance, in their
four-factor nested model of organizational learning, Silins et al. (2002) examined
the extent to which people feel free to take initiative and risks as a key mediator of

123

J Educ Change


leadership effects on student outcomes, yet little is known about the school
environment around disagreements and help-seeking. Indeed, recent education
research calls for future research that investigates ways of reducing defensiveness
such as providing an environment that is ‘‘safe’’ for admitting mistakes and that
rewards individuals for trying out new approaches to instructional practice (Goh
et al. 2006). Introducing and validating the construct of psychological safety would
address this call and contribute to our understanding of how certain kinds of
organizational climates can facilitate learning in schools.

Experimentation (EXP)

A second dimension of the Garvin et al. (2008) model that we pull out for special
consideration in this context is ‘‘experimentation.’’ This particular element is part of
Garvin and colleagues’ ‘‘learning processes and practices’’ (p. 3) building block and
aligns well with the cognitive strand of organizational learning research. A great
deal of recent education research has investigated processes for the collection,
creation, analysis, transfer, and application of information and knowledge in schools
(Schechter 2008; Stoll et al. 2006) including recent research on the social networks
that enable innovation in schools (Moolenaar et al. 2011).
   The research is less clear on what experimentation and innovation look like in
schools and how prevalent teachers feel experimentation and innovation actually
are, although some recent work by the Chicago Consortium for School Research
has examined teacher attitudes about trying out new practices, staying positive,
and taking responsibility for school improvement (Bryk et al. 2010). Specifically,
the CCSR innovation scale indicates teachers’ orientations towards continual
learning and new ideas as well as their willingness to be part of an active learning
environment (Chicago Consortium for School Research, 2007). However, the
focus has often been on teacher attitudes and orientations rather than teacher
perceptions about new behaviors and practices that are enacted schoolwide.
Moreover, it is not clear whether teachers see experimentation and innovation as
the same construct; rather, the focus in some of the work on innovation in
education has been on gathering and assessing appropriate data for teaching and
learning. For example, recent research by Schechter (2008) using his Organiza-
tional Learning Mechanisms (OLM) scale has examined in-depth how information
is acquired, analyzed, disseminated, stored, retrieved, and then ‘‘put to use’’ by
teachers in elementary schools. The final item, ‘‘put to use,’’ includes an
assessment of how teachers change the curriculum based upon feedback they
receive (Schechter 2008, p. 162). Still, in this example, as in others, much less is
known about the extent to which teachers ‘‘try out’’ or ‘‘experiment’’ with new
ideas and instructional practices in schools. Adding this component of ‘‘exper-
imentation’’ to our assessment of OL in schools would extend prior OL research
by enabling scholars to better understand what role experimentation plays in the
context of organizational learning. That said, the recent emphasis on standard-
ization and centralization of instruction in an era of high stakes accountability
raises questions about what experimentation looks like in schools and who
actually engages in experimentation and at what level. The items by Garvin et al.

                                                                             123

                                                                          J Educ Change


(2008), as adapted here, attempt to capture teacher perceptions of experimentation
at the school level.

Leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL)

In addition, we pull out a third component in the Garvin et al. (2008) model which is
‘‘leadership that reinforces learning.’’ In previous years, the literature on leading
district reform has focused primarily on theories of alignment rather than theories of
organizational learning. The perspective has been that the leader’s primary
responsibility is to ensure that all facets of the school system such as its structure,
staffing, and the curriculum are aligned with specific agreed upon targets or goals
for change. With recent emphasis on compliance with centralized reform initiatives
such as No Child Left Behind, this pressure to execute against specific targets has
only increased. Yet as Knapp (2008) recently argued, this perspective fails to
capture the complexities of leading schoolwide reform. Challenges abound for
school leaders today including the unevenness of capacity in schools, lack of
resources, incomplete and ambiguous information, and competing stakeholder
agendas. Consequently, it comes as no surprise to education scholars such as Knapp
that scholars and practitioners alike have now turned to the ‘‘construct of learning to
embrace the challenge of reforming districts’’ (Knapp 2008, p. 524). Here, we
address this need for empirical research on the role of school leaders in facilitating
organizational learning by considering the role of the principal in creating
conditions for organizational learning in schools.
    Each of the leadership items in the Garvin et al. (2008) model are consistent with
the idea espoused in education research that leaders, such as superintendents and
principals, should not only be good learners themselves; they should facilitate
learning in their teachers (Collinson et al. 2006; Johnson 1996). Therefore, the
Garvin model moves us beyond leadership theories centered on organizing to
execute, to leadership that centers on organizing to learn (see Edmondson 2008, on
organizing to learn).
    Recent literature on educational leadership has begun to focus on the key role of
leaders in developing teachers’ capacity, though few instruments examine specific
leadership behaviors associated with facilitating organizational learning amongst
teachers schoolwide. For example, the Vanderbilt Assessment of Leadership in
Education (VAL-ED) examines the extent to which principals support, implement,
and monitor communities of professional practice and develop cultures of learning
for students (Porter et al. 2010). Similarly, Leithwood and Jantzi’s (2006)
transformational leadership instrument probes whether principals support and
encourage collaborative work and the consideration of new ideas. In both cases,
however, little is known about specific leadership behaviors that reinforce a learning
climate amongst school personnel.
    In the present research, we single out these three dimensions to add to the
complementary streams of literature described above, and we test the conceptual
framework and instrument developed by Garvin et al. (2008) for measuring
organizational learning. The hypothesized model by Garvin et al. (2008) of the
relationship between the proposed building blocks and organizational learning is

123

J Educ Change


based upon prior research on OL in organizational behavior but has yet to be
validated, or, for our purposes, adapted and then validated for the context of
education. Moreover, it is unclear whether the dimensions of interest (psychological
safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning) are preconditions
for organizational learning or manifestations of OL; thus, a deeper understanding of
this relationship requires empirical testing. We modified and validated subscales for
each of the three dimensions of interest: psychological safety (as measured by three
items), experimentation (as measured by three items), and leadership that reinforces
learning (as measured by six items). We then explored the relationship of each of
these subscales to the larger construct of organizational learning. Thus, our
empirical research question was: What is the relationship between psychological
safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning with regards to
organizational learning? Specifically, we asked:
1.     Are the subscales of psychological safety (PS), experimentation (EXP), and
       leadership that reinforce learning (LTRL) discrete subfactors of the second-
       order factor of organizational learning?
2.     Are the subfactors (PS, EXP, LTRL) necessary intermediaries to organizational
       learning?
3.     What is the direction of the relationship between organizational learning and
       the subfactors (PS, EXP, and LTRL)?



Data

The present study uses survey data from 941 teachers in a large urban district in the
United States. The district is representative of the largest urban districts in the
country with over 100,000 students enrolled in more than 500 schools constituting a
predominately low-income, minority population. The survey items used for this
study were included in a larger pilot survey designed to provide principals with
feedback from teachers on their performance.
   The survey instrument was administered by the district in electronic format at the
end of the spring of 2008 to a stratified convenience sample of teachers in 60
schools within the district. In all, 941 teachers responded for a total response rate of
37%.1 The sample was stratified by school level and principal tenure,2 and all school
identifiers were stripped from the dataset before it was released by the district. Of
the 60 schools, 8 had response rates greater than 50%, and 32 had response rates
greater than 30%. The schools’ response rates ranged widely from 5 to 74%. Post
hoc focus groups suggested that the low overall response rate was at least in part due
to the timing of the administration of the survey which was in late spring.
   Teacher-level demographics were not available to the researchers beyond the
grade range taught and whether or not the teacher held a leadership position in their

1
    According to our district contact, district surveys typically have response rates of about 20%.
2
 Principals were categorized according to whether or not they were new; 60% of the sampled schools
were led by new principals.


                                                                                              123

                                                                         J Educ Change


school. Of the teachers responding to the survey, 33% taught pre-kindergarten
through 6th grade, 12% taught 7th or 8th grade, and 63% taught 9–12th grade.
Leadership positions were held by 39% of the respondents (e.g., site council
representative, union delegate, curriculum coordinator, lead teacher, department
head, or other). Of the schools represented by responding teachers, 33% were
elementary schools and 67% were middle and high schools. The data did not contain
additional school characteristics.



Measures

We selected scales of interest from the full Garvin et al. (2008) organizational
learning survey tool and modified them for use in a school context. In particular,
we examined three subscales sampling the constructs of psychological safety (PS),
experimentation (EXP), and leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL). After a
review of item content and cognitive pretesting (in which respondents talked
through their thought processes as they read and answered each item), we modified
items in the scales to sample these constructs making the language specific to
schools (e.g., changed ‘‘unit’’ to ‘‘school’’) and clarified for respondents that the
level of analysis was at the school level. We also eliminated a handful of items we
anticipated would not function well in a school context. For example, from the
original 5-item experimentation scale, we removed an item that read, ‘‘This unit
frequently employs prototypes or simulations when trying out new ideas.’’ (Garvin
et al. 2008, p. 5). We also removed two items from the original 8-item leadership
that reinforces learning scale that had to do with a leader’s provision of resources,
time, and money, whereas all other items in the scale involved leader behaviors
that supported learning. Finally, we removed two psychological safety items that
differed from other items in the original 5-item scale as they assessed actions rather
than dispositions. The modified subscales piloted in this study were thus as
follows:
•   Psychological Safety (PS): This 3-item subscale from the OL building block,
    Supportive Learning Environment, measures on a 7-point response scale
    (7 = highest) whether teachers feel their school is a place where they can make
    mistakes and take the kinds of personal and intellectual risks that are necessary
    for continuous improvement. Teachers who felt psychologically safe indicated
    that people in their school were usually comfortable talking about problems and
    disagreements, that they were eager to share information about what does and
    doesn’t work, and that mistakes were not be held against them.
•   Experimentation (EXP): This 3-item subscale from the OL building block,
    Learning Processes and Practices, measures on a 7-point scale (7 = highest)
    how teachers perceive the school’s capacity for experimentation to achieve
    improvements. For example, items ask teachers if they feel within their schools
    that experimentation occurs frequently with new instructional practices or
    strategies, and/or there exists a formal process for conducting and evaluating
    experiments or new ideas.


123

J Educ Change


•     Leadership that Reinforces Learning (LTRL): This 6-item subscale measures the
      full Leadership building block and captures the extent to which principals’
      behavior communicates the support and value they place on learning. Teachers
      who responded with the highest rating (7 = highest) felt that their principal
      exemplified behaviors such as asking probing questions and acknowledging his
      or her own limitations with regard to knowledge, information, or expertise.3



Procedures

Prior to our use of the three subscales selected for this study, the full Garvin et al.
(2008) organizational learning tool was subjected to two stages of field testing and
refinement using 432 subjects in four separate populations to ensure the reliability
and validity of the measures. Although the original field testing included two public
sector organizations, neither were educational institutions, so we then reviewed and
conducted cognitive testing with educational practitioners and researchers on the
full original scales for psychological safety (PS), experimentation (EXP), and
leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL) to assess the applicability of individual
items to the school context. We made slight modifications to the language of items
making them specific to school contexts and then embedded our items in a larger,
pilot survey administered to teachers in a large urban school district. Because all the
items were drawn from a survey measuring organizational learning, we expected
items and subscales to be highly correlated. However, our specific concern here is
rather the dimensionality and underlying structure of organizational learning as
captured in the subscales and their covariance. Thus, we used confirmatory factor
analysis (CFA) to confirm the structure of our factors, refine our scales, and examine
how they related to the construct of organizational learning. Finally, we used path
analysis to explore the directionality of any relationships confirmed in our data.


Data Analyses

Question 1: Are the subscales of psychological safety (PS), experimentation
(EXP), and leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL) discrete subfactors of the
second-order factor of organizational learning?
   To begin, we examined the subscales of psychological safety, experimentation,
and leadership that reinforces learning for their internal consistency reliability
(Hatcher 1994). Specifically, we examined descriptive statistics for each subscale,
bivariate correlations among the individual items, and estimated the Cronbach’s
alpha reliability statistics for the subscales.
   Since much of the literature suggests multiple components to the secondary
construct of organizational learning (e.g., Goh et al. 2006; Leithwood et al. 1998;
Silins et al. 2002), we then followed the procedures for confirmatory factor analysis

3
    See Appendix A for the text of study measures.


                                                                            123

                                                                         J Educ Change


described by Friendly (1995) and Kline (2005) to examine whether the subscales of
psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning are,
indeed, discrete subfactors of the secondary factor of organizational learning. We fit
a hypothetical model, as suggested by the Garvin et al. (2008) model (see Fig. 1),
using the maximum likelihood method in the SAS system’s CALIS procedure and
examined three commonly used goodness-of-fit indices to determine model fit: the
Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA), Bentler’s Comparative Fit
Index (Bentler 1989), and the Bentler and Bonnet’s Non-Normed Fit Index (Bentler
and Bonett 1980; Hatcher 1994; Kline 1994, 2005). As recommended by Hatcher
(1994), we identified poorly functioning items by examining residuals. We then
examined the substance of the questions in order to determine if there was a
substantive reason that might explain the poor fit prior to removal.
   We refit the reduced model and examined factor loadings, correlations (R2), error
terms, and p values to confirm that our proposed hypothetical model was an
appropriate description of the data.
Question 2: Are the subfactors (PS, EXP, LTRL) necessary intermediaries to
organizational learning?
   We again used CFA to investigate two alternative hypotheses: (1)whether the
subfactors of psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces
learning are discrete factors that are important to the construct of organizational
learning (H0), or whether (2) there are no subfactors in the domain of organizational
learning (H1). As above, we fit hypothetical models (see Fig. 2) and examined fit to
determine which rival hypothesis was confirmed by the data.
Question 3: What is direction of the relationship between organizational learning
and the subfactors (PS, EXP, and LTRL)?
   Using CFA and path analysis, we examined two rival hypotheses (see Fig. 3) to
determine the direction of the relationship between organizational learning and
psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning (PS,
EXP, and LTRL). Specifically, we were interested in finding out whether the factors
were expressions of organizational learning (H0) or whether, in contrast they were
determinants of organizational learning (H1).


Findings: Validation of proposed building blocks of organizational learning

Question 1: Are the subscales of psychological safety (PS), experimentation
(EXP), and leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL) discrete subfactors of the
second-order factor of organizational learning?
   We first examined the internal consistency reliability of the organizational
learning construct and its three hypothesized components of psychological safety,
experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning. In Table 1, Panels A–C,
we display the item intercorrelations, the item means, and standard deviations for
each of the three subscales of organizational learning. We also provide the estimated


123

J Educ Change




Fig. 1 Hypothetical model of the relationship between the three subscales of psychological safety (PS),
experimentation (EXP), and leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL) and the hypothesized second-
order factor of organizational learning


Cronbach’s alpha internal consistency reliability for each subscale. When we look at
these descriptive statistics for each of the subscales; we note that each subscale
appears to hang together as a construct and is thus an appropriate candidate for
CFA.


                                                                                          123

                                                                                        J Educ Change




Fig. 2 Rival hypothetical models to test whether the subfactors (PS, EXP, and LTRL) are necessary
intermediaries to OL




Fig. 3 Rival hypothetical models to test the directionality of the relationship between subfactors (PS,
EXP, and LTRL) and the second-order construct of organizational learning (OL)


   As expected, the correlations between these subscales were high ranging from
0.61 between experimentation (EXP) and leadership that reinforces learning
(LTRL) to 0.85 between psychological safety (PS) and leadership that reinforces


123

J Educ Change


Table 1 Panels A–C: Tables showing the within subscale item correlations, item means, and item
standard deviations for psychological safety (PS), experimentation (EXP), and leadership that reinforces
learning (LTRL)

Panel A: Psychological safety

Indicators                        PS1                              PS2                             PS3

PS1                               1.00
PS2                               0.66***                          1.00
PS3                               0.61***                          0.64***                         1.00
Chronbach coefficient alpha = .83
Mean                              4.69                             4.56                            5.31
SD                                2.06                             1.86                            1.63
N = 933

Panel B: Experimentation

Indicators                       EXP1                            EXP2                            EXP3

EXP1                             1.00
EXP2                             0.74***                         1.00
EXP3                             0.49***                         0.45***                         1.00
Chronbach coefficient alpha = .79
Mean                             4.83                            5.00                            3.95
SD                               1.65                            1.63                            1.83
N = 922

Panel C: Leadership that reinforces learning

Indicators       LTRL1           LTRL2           LTRL3           LTRL4          LTRL5           LTRL6

LTRL1            1.00
LTRL2            0.78***         1.00
LTRL3            0.79***         0.75***         1.00
LTRL4            0.80***         0.77***         0.79***         1.00
LTRL5            0.88***         0.80***         0.82***         0.86***        1.00
LTRL6            0.50***         0.51***         0.46***         0.52***        0.55***         1.00
Chronbach coefficient alpha = .79
Mean             5.20            4.91            5.01            5.12           4.95            4.61
SD               1.92            1.98            1.89            1.99           2.02            2.02
N = 914

*** p \ .001


learning (LTRL). Our interest here, however, is the covariance between these
subscales which gives us a better understanding of the underlying dimensionality of
the larger construct of organizational learning. To this end, we used CFA to assess
whether the three target subscales (PS, EXP, and LTRL) represent constructs that
are captured by the second-order factor of organizational learning. We first fit a
hypothetical model for the 3-item construct of psychological safety, the 3-item

                                                                                           123

                                                                                        J Educ Change


construct of experimentation, and the 6-item construct of leadership that reinforces
learning. This model posits that each latent factor can be accurately estimated by
including all items in the scale accounting for their respective measurement errors
(Hatcher 1994). The hypothetical model failed to achieve good model fit.
    Following the steps outlined in our procedures, we identified that one item in
each of the experimentation (EXP) and leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL)
scales had exceptionally large residuals. In addition to these problematic residuals,
the third item in the experimentation subscale4 differed substantively from the other
two experimentation items in focusing on the existence of a process rather than on
actual practices. Similarly, the sixth item in the leadership that reinforces learning
subscale5 also had problematic residuals and differed substantively from the
remaining leadership that reinforces learning items. In this case, the reverse-coded
item was the only one to attribute proactively negative behaviors to the principal.
After removing these two items, we then refit the reduced model and confirmed that
this final, proposed model accurately described our data.
    This final reduced, fitted model contains three psychological safety items, two
experimentation items, and five leadership that reinforces learning items. It met the
threshold for an acceptable model fit based on three goodness-of-fit statistics. The
RMSEA, which measures the ‘‘badness of fit,’’ indicated an acceptable model fit
with a value of 0.08 (where \0.05 indicates good fit and \0.08 indicates a fair fit)
(Hatcher 1994). The Bentler’s Comparative Fit Index (CFI) of 0.98 and Bentler and
Bonnet’s Non-Normed Fit Index (NNFI) of 0.99 also indicated good fit (with good
fit indicated by values exceeding 0.90 for both indices; Hatcher 1994).
    Thus, as seen in Fig. 4, the final model fit indicates that psychological safety,
experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning are, indeed, discrete
subfactors of the secondary factor of organizational learning. All estimated factor
loadings and item error variances were statistically significant at the p \ 0.0001 level.
    Given this final model, we calculated individual indicator reliability for each item
and found these ranged from a low of 0.51 for the third item on the psychological
safety subscale (PS3) to a high of 0.92 for the fifth item on the leadership that
reinforces learning subscale (LTRL5). At the subscale level, psychological safety
(PS) has a composite reliability of 0.83 but captures only 63% of the observed
variance, largely due to low item reliability for both the second and third items in the
scale (PS2 and PS3). Experimentation has a composite reliability of 0.86 and
captures 75% of observed variance with individual reliabilities of 0.86 and 0.64 for
the two items. Finally, leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL) has a composite
reliability of 0.95 and captures 81% of observed variance with all individual items
having strong individual reliabilities (see Table 2 below). Each of the subscales
displays strong composite reliability indicating strong internal consistency reliability
(Kline 2005). Altogether, these findings support the internal reliability consistency of
each of the three subscales of psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership
that reinforces learning (PS, EXP, and LTRL) with 3, 2, and 5 indicator variables,
respectively, as well as the second-order factor of organizational learning.

4
    EXP3: ‘‘This school has a formal process for conducting and evaluating experiments or new ideas.’’
5
    LTRL6: ‘‘My principal criticizes views different from his or her own.’’


123

J Educ Change




Fig. 4 Final fitted model of the relationship between the three subscales of psychological safety (PS),
experimentation (EXP), and leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL) and the hypothesized second-
order factor of organizational learning


Question 2: Are the subfactors of psychological safety, experimentation, and
leadership that reinforces learning (PS, EXP, LTRL) necessary intermediaries to
organizational learning (OL)?


                                                                                          123

                                                                                       J Educ Change


Table 2 Table showing the loadings and the estimated composite reliability indices for each of the
subscales and the second-order factor of organizational learning in our final fitted model
Construct and indicators           Standardized     Indicator      Error       Composite      Variance
                                   loading          reliability*   variance*   reliability    extracted

Psychological safety                                                           0.83           0.63
PS1                                0.90             0.80           0.20
PS2                                0.76             0.57           0.43
PS3                                0.71             0.51           0.49
Experimentation                                                                0.86           0.75
EXP1                               0.93             0.86           0.14
EXP2                               0.80             0.64           0.36
Leading that reinforces learning                                               0.95           0.81
LTRL1                              0.92             0.84           0.16
LTRL2                              0.85             0.72           0.28
LTRL3                              0.87             0.75           0.25
LTRL4                              0.90             0.80           0.20
LTRL5                              0.96             0.92           0.08

* Indicator reliability is the square of the standardized loading. Error variance is determined by sub-
tracting the indicator reliability from 1



   To test whether the three factors of psychological safety, experimentation, and
leadership that reinforces learning (PS, EXP, and LTRL) were necessary
intermediaries to the second-order factor of OL, we tested two rival, hypothesized
models which describe two possible relationships between OL and the indicators of
teacher perceptions of OL. The rival hypotheses were constructed to follow CFA
procedures for testing moderation or mediation of the intermediate constructs on
overall organizational learning (Kline 2005). The first model (H0 in Fig. 5) proposes
that organizational learning is an underlying condition which is expressed by
teacher perceptions of the subfactors of psychological safety, experimentation, and
leadership that reinforces learning.
   This hypothesized model met the threshold for acceptable model fit based on
three goodness-of-fit statistics. Specifically, the RMSEA indicated an acceptable
model fit with a value of 0.08. Finally, the Bentler’s Comparative Fit Index (CFI) of
0.98 and Bentler and Bonnet’s Non-Normed Fit Index (NNFI) of 0.98 also indicate
good fit (Hatcher 1994).
   In contrast, our rival model posited that the relationships between organizational
learning and the indicators of teacher perceptions were direct and not moderated by
the subfactors of psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that
reinforces learning (PS, EXP, and LTRL). However, we reject this model based
on poor fit statistics (RMSEA = 0.17, CFI = 0.880, NNFI = 0.85). We, thereby,
conclude that the three subfactors of psychological safety, experimentation, and
leadership that reinforces learning are necessary mediating factors within the
second-order construct of organizational learning (as shown in Fig. 5).



123

J Educ Change




Fig. 5 Figure showing rival hypotheses regarding the relationship between the second-order factor of OL
and the indicators of organizational learning (items)


Question 3: What is direction of the relationship between organizational learning
and the subfactors of psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that
reinforces learning?
   Despite the plethora of research on OL, there is little empirical evidence
regarding the directionality of the relationship between overall organizational
learning and its subcomponents. Thus, for our final set of analyses, we used CFA to
examine the pathway between OL and the three subfactors of psychological safety,
experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning (PS, EXP, and LTRL), in
order to determine the direction of this relationship. We examined and fit two rival
hypotheses to determine whether the factors were expressions of organizational
learning or whether, in contrast, they were determinants of organizational learning.


                                                                                          123

                                                                                 J Educ Change


   Our first hypothesized model (H0 in Fig. 6) proposes that OL is an underlying
construct or condition that expresses itself through the subfactors of psychological
safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning. Based on the fit
statistics for this model, we confirmed this hypothesis. Specifically, the RMSEA,
which measures the ‘‘badness of fit,’’ indicated an acceptable model fit with a value of
0.08 (Hatcher 1994). Bentler’s Comparative Fit Index (CFI) of 0.98 and Bentler and
Bonnet’s Non-Normed Fit Index (NNFI) of 0.98 also indicate good fit (Hatcher 1994).
   Our rival model (H1 in Fig. 6) hypothesized that teacher perceptions of
psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning
predict levels of organizational learning. The fit statistics for this model suggest that
this model fits the data poorly: RMSEA = 0.22, CFI = 0.83, NNFI = 0.75. We,
thereby, conclude that the observed levels of the indicators of psychological safety,
experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning subfactors are measurable
expressions or manifestations of the second-order construct of organizational
learning.


Discussion

The goal of the present research was to investigate the merits of drawing upon
and applying organizational learning theory and methods from the field of




Fig. 6 Figure showing rival hypotheses regarding the directionality of the relationship between
organizational learning and the indicators used to sample this domain


123

J Educ Change


organizational behavior to better understand organizational learning in schools. We
investigated these both conceptually and empirically. From a conceptual perspec-
tive, our review of the OL literature pointed toward a need for better integration
between two parallel streams of OL research: a cognitive stream that has
emphasized individuals’ abilities to search, process, store, and manage information
and a sociocultural stream that has emphasized the social relationships and practices
in which learning is embedded. As education scholars suggested, the OL literature
in education has become bifurcated, which has undermined research progress on
organizational reform.
   To answer this call for integration in the literature, we drew specifically upon the
work of Garvin et al. (2008) who published an organizational learning tool for
practitioners but whose dimensions had not yet been tested or adapted, and for our
purposes, we applied it to the context of education. By introducing specific
constructs from organizational behavior theory such as ‘‘psychological safety’’
(Edmondson 1999), experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning, we
provide new ways of describing and also studying the learning environment for
adults, specifically teachers, in schools. Rather than presenting these constructs as a
comprehensive tool, we see these measures as augmenting the existing instruments
and scales in the growing literature on organizational learning in schools, and we
present them as an integrated conceptualization of key aspects of OL.
   Using confirmatory factor analyses, we were able to validate three subscales for
use assessing levels of psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that
reinforces learning. We were also able to confirm that even though each of these
constructs captures a different and necessary dimension of organizational learning,
they are all explained by the second-order factor of organizational learning. For
practical purposes, the discrete nature of the subscales suggests that organizational
learning is indeed a multifaceted construct. As Garvin and colleagues suggest, there
are discrete dimensions within the domain of organizational learning: ‘‘Each block
and its discrete subcomponents, though vital to the whole, are independent and can
be measured separately’’ (Garvin et al. 2008, p. 2). We cannot sample one
dimension (e.g., experimentation) and assume that we have adequately sampled the
global construct of organizational learning, nor can we generalize about levels of
organizational learning from observed levels of one discrete dimension. Rather, the
subscales considered simultaneously and in an integrated way describe the overall
construct of organizational learning. In this case, we found that the quality of a
school’s organizational learning is best understood by considering our three
subscales jointly.
   We also found that the second-order factor of organizational learning predicts
levels of psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces
learning. In other words, in schools with strong organizational learning cultures,
teachers are more likely to report higher levels of psychological safety,
experimentation, and leadership that reinforces learning. Although future research
is warranted, our analyses suggest, therefore, that rather than using the subscales to
sample preconditions of organizational learning, we may be able to use these scales
to better understand the dimensionality of organizational learning in different
contexts. Prior research has suggested that ‘‘building blocks of organizational

                                                                            123

                                                                             J Educ Change


learning reinforce each other’’ (Garvin et al. 2008, p. 5), but this is the first empirical
test of the directionality of these relationships.
   One way to think about the practical significance of our findings is to consider
hypothetical examples of how these subcomponents might or might not relate to one
another in practice. Our findings suggest that only addressing one dimension of
organizational learning may not lead to higher levels of organizational learning.
Indeed, one possible interpretation of the analysis is that efforts to increase levels of
organizational learning cannot do so in a piecemeal way by focusing on one or
another of the dimensions of organizational learning. For example, consider a
hypothetical faculty meeting in which the principal acknowledges the limitations of
her own knowledge and seeks input and direction from the group. However, suppose
the teachers in her school, for whatever historical and/or external reason, don’t feel
eager to share what works and does not work and as a faculty, have no habit of
experimenting with new ways of working. In this context, the principal’s exercise
of leadership behaviors that support learning might not be a good measure of
organizational learning in the school as a whole.
   Rather, achieving higher levels of organizational learning may necessitate paying
attention to several dimensions of organizational learning concurrently. To return to
our prior example, in this hypothetical school, the organization has relatively high
levels of leadership that reinforce learning, but the staff feels unsafe and has little
experience with experimentation. In order to improve organizational learning, our
findings suggest that the principal – who already leads in ways that reinforce
learning—might also need to attend to strategies that address psychological safety
and experimentation. She might examine these aspects of the climate further and
follow up with opportunities for pair and share conversations, anonymous feedback,
and teacher-coach assisted experimentation. However, interventions that might be
appropriate for this school are potentially very different from possible interventions
for a school with similar, overall reported levels of organizational learning but in
which teachers report high levels of psychological safety yet low levels of
experimentation and leadership that reinforce learning—a context that perhaps
suggests complacency.
   As Garvin and colleagues imply, multiple building blocks are ‘‘vital to the
whole,’’ (Garvin et al. 2008, p. 2); they are essential to building an overarching
organizational learning environment. This parts/whole perspective jibes nicely with
recent research on school reform by Bryk et al. (2010) who liken reform to baking a
cake in which five essential ingredients—including creating an effective school
learning climate for teachers—must all be included. Here, we offer specific
constructs that we hope will complement the existing literature in enabling scholars
and practitioners alike to measure several key facets of organizational learning and
consider their implications for school improvement.


Study limitations and implications for future research

Of course, this study is not without limitations. Future research conducted with a
larger sample, a higher response rate, and the inclusion of other scales to conduct

123

J Educ Change


correlational analyses to test convergent and divergent validity would allow us to
investigate further whether the relationships originally proposed by Garvin et al.
(2008) among these OL building blocks of organizational learning perform as
theory and prior research would suggest. Moreover, teachers in high schools were
overrepresented in our sample compared to those in elementary schools. Organi-
zational and cultural differences between elementary and comprehensive high
school settings may contribute to different understandings of constructs like
‘‘psychological safety’’ and ‘‘organizational learning’’ in these two contexts—a
difference that could be untangled in further research. Such analyses would provide
greater validity for the use of these measures and the instrument introduced by
Garvin and colleagues employed here.
   Secondly, this validation study suggests the need for additional development,
refinement, and field testing of items that sample key dimensions of organizational
learning. For example, experimentation was reduced to only two items and in its
modified form, had a relatively high level of error which indicates that it is a weak
measure. Substantively, a reasonable explanation for this may be that in school
settings, the word ‘‘experimentation’’ has different connotations than it does in other
sectors. Moreover, because control over curriculum and instruction is increasingly
centralized in this particular school system and in other similar large urban school
systems, teachers may be less likely to associate ‘‘experimentation’’ at the school
level as a positive component of organizational learning. The weakness of the
measure may also be related to the substantive changes required for the best overall
model fit; the two retained items related to the frequency of experimentation while
the third item (which was eliminated) related to monitoring or evaluating the results
of experimentation. Examining data on additional measures of organizational
learning focused on this construct within a different district context, and using
different, less loaded terms might better inform our understanding of the construct
of experimentation and/or innovation in school settings. Such analyses might also
further our ability to extend and build upon recent education research on innovation
(e.g., Moolenaar et al. 2011).
   Third, lacking access to demographic and socioeconomic data or disaggregated
data on student performance linked to the schools in this study, we were also limited
in our ability to examine relationships between specific school contexts and
observed levels of organizational capacity beyond those reported. For example,
although we found that teachers in some schools felt, on average, more
psychologically safe than teachers in other schools, the limitations of our data
prevent us from exploring whether these teachers differ from their colleagues in
some substantive ways making them less likely, for example, to fear being penalized
for their mistakes. It also limited us on assessing whether those schools differ in
systematic ways from other schools.
   Finally, we cannot draw conclusions about what leads to the reported levels of
organizational capacity that we observed in these data. Without longitudinal data
that links teacher and school responses over time, we cannot investigate causal links
between various teacher and school-level characteristics such as access to and
availability of resources and the levels of organizational learning in those schools.
Future research that examines these constructs longitudinally along with some clear

                                                                            123

                                                                           J Educ Change


outcome indicators would strengthen our understanding of ‘‘organizational capac-
ity,’’ especially if such quantitative data were coupled with qualitative research. For
example, insights into the actual behaviors that teachers engage in when
‘‘experimenting’’ would help us better understand if and how reported levels of
‘‘experimentation’’ match with actual changes in instructional practice in the
classroom in schools.


Conclusion

This study suggests that a more theoretically integrated understanding of
organizational learning in schools has much to offer efforts to improve instruction
and enhance student achievement systemwide. By taking a conceptually integrated
stance and empirically testing an organizational learning instrument in a large urban
district, this research contributes to our knowledge of how, from the perspective of
teachers, organizational learning is manifest at a school site. In this way, our work
builds upon seminal research on the social context in which teachers work (e.g.,
McLaughlin et al. 1990) and aligns with contemporary research on organizational
learning in school systems as well (e.g., Bryk et al. 2010). In particular, the modified
scales of psychological safety, experimentation, and leadership that reinforces
learning provide a nuanced tool for examining the key organizational climate,
practices and processes, and leadership within which collective learning takes place.
Our findings not only reaffirm the notion that effective school change processes
must go beyond new programs and structures and attend to the overall culture for
capacity building, they also suggest that piecemeal interventions that address
isolated elements of organizational learning may be insufficient for refashioning
schools into ‘‘learning organizations.’’
   At the same time, we note that organizational learning may be but one element in
the equation for high performance. As organizational scholars have recently
suggested, high performance is most likely achieved when organizations feel a
strong sense of accountability (or shared responsibility) for creating positive
outcomes (Edmondson 2008). In the context of school systems design, education
scholars contend that the accountability of local professionals to educate and
support every child and his or her caretakers is paramount to improving
performance (Bryk et al. 2010). At the local level, then, the ideal school may
possibly be one in which teachers feel psychologically safe to speak up and ask for
help and are motivated to do so by their shared responsibility or accountability for
high-quality teaching and learning. As Edmondson (2008) argues, an environment
in which people feel psychologically safe but not accountable is one in which there
is apt to be complacency, whereas an environment in which one feels accountable
but not psychologically safe is one in which individuals are less likely to take risks
or engage in the kind of transformational learning many experts deem necessary to
improve schools today. In isolation, the constructs of psychological safety and
experimentation cannot definitively diagnose the condition of an individual school’s
organizational culture, but findings based on these scales can point educators and
researchers towards aspects of school culture that need further exploration. That

123

J Educ Change


said, future researchers can build upon our work by examining OL differences
across schools including observed differences in reported levels of psychological
safety and experimentation. Moreover, researchers can clarify the relationship
between these constructs and various teacher and school characteristics including
teacher experience and teacher learning orientation as well as teachers’ collective
efficacy and shared accountability for student learning.


Appendix A: Items in the scales

Indicators in the initial, hypothesized subscales of organizational learning

Items in the psychological safety (PS) subscale:
(1)   In this school, it is easy to speak up about what is on your mind.
(2)   People in this school are usually comfortable talking about problems and
      disagreements.
(3)   People in this school are eager to share information about what does and
      doesn’t work.
   Items in the experimentation (EXP) subscale:
(1)   This school experiments frequently with new ways of working.
(2)   This school experiments frequently with new instructional practices or
      strategies.
(3)   This school has a formal process for conducting and evaluating experiments or
      new ideas.
   Items in the leadership that reinforces learning (LTRL) subscale:
(1)   My principal invites input from others in discussions.
(2)   My principal acknowledges his or her own limitations with respect to
      knowledge, information, or expertise.
(3)   My principal asks probing questions.
(4)   My principal listens attentively.
(5)   My principal encourages multiple points of view.
(6)   My principal criticizes views different from his or her own. (reverse coded
      item)




References

Argyris, C., & Schon, D. A. (1996). Organizational learning II: Theory, methods and practice. Reading,
     MA: Addison-Wesley.
Bentler, P. M. (1989). Causal modeling via structural equation systems. In J. R. Nesselroade &
     R. B. Cattell (Eds.), Handbook of multivariate experimental psychology: Perspectives on individual
     difference (2nd ed., pp. 317–335). New York: Plenum Press.




                                                                                          123

                                                                                            J Educ Change


Bentler, P. M., & Bonett, D. G. (1980). Significance tests and goodness of fit in the analysis of covariance
     structures. Psychological Bulletin, 88, 588–606.
Boudett, K. P., City, E. A., & Murnane, R. J. (Eds.). (2005). Data wise: A step-by-step guide to using
     assessment results to improve teaching and learning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Boyd, W. L. (Ed.). (2008). American Journal of Education, 114(4), 521–700.
Bryk, A. S., Camburn, E., & Louis, K. S. (1999). Professional community in Chicago elementary schools:
     Facilitating factors and organizational consequences. Educational Administration Quarterly, 35(5),
     751–781.
Bryk, A. S., & Schneider, B. (2003). Trust in schools: A core resource for school reform. Educational
     Leadership, 60(6), 40–44.
Bryk, A. S., Sebring, P. E., Allensworth, A. L., & Easton, J. Q. (2010). Organizing schools for
     improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chicago Consortium for School Research. (2007). Items that compose the measure innovation. Retrieved
     from http://ccsr.uchicago.edu/surveymeasures2007/innv.html.
Cohen, D. (1990). A revolution in one classroom: The case of Mrs. Oublier. Educational Evaluation and
     Policy Analysis, 12(3), 311–329.
Cohen, W., & Levinthal, D. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation.
     Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), 128–152.
Cole, M., & Wertsch, J. V. (1996). Beyond the individual-social antinomy in discussions of Piaget and
     Vygotsky. Human Development, 39(5), 250–256.
Collinson, V., Cook, T., & Conley, S. (2006). Organizational learning in schools and school systems:
     Improving learning, teaching, and leading. Theory into Practice, 45(2), 107–116.
Copland, M. A., & Knapp, M. S. (2006). Connecting leadership with learning: A framework for
     reflection, planning, and action. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum
     Development.
Cousins, J. B. (1996). Understanding organizational learning for educational leadership and school
     reform. In K. Leithwood, J. Chapman, P. Corson, P. Hallinger, & A. Hart (Eds.), International
     handbook of educational leadership and administration (pp. 589–652). Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
     Kluwer Academic.
Darling-Hammond, L. (1996). What matters most: A competent teacher for every child. Phi Delta
     Kappan, 78(3), 193–200.
Edmondson, A. C. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams. Administrative
     Science Quarterly, 44(2), 350–383.
Edmondson, A. C. (2003). Speaking up in the operating room: How team leaders promote learning in
     interdisciplinary action teams. Journal of Management Studies, 40(6), 1419–1452.
Edmondson, A. C. (2008). The competitive imperative of learning. Harvard Business Review, 86(7),
     60–67.
Elmore, R. F. (2002). Unwarranted intrusion. Education Next, 2(1), 30–35.
Friendly, M. (1995). Planning a factor analytic study. Retrieved from http://www.psych.yorku.ca/
     lab/psy6140/fa/facplan.htm.
Fullan, M. (1995). The school as learning organization: Distant dreams. Theory into Practice, 34(4),
     230–235.
Gallucci, C. (2008). Districtwide instructional reform: Using sociocultural theory to link professional
     learning to organizational support. American Journal of Education, 114(4), 541–581.
Garvin, D. A., Edmondson, A. C., & Gino, F. (2008). Is yours a learning organization? Harvard Business
     Review, 86(3), 109–116.
Giles, C., & Hargreaves, A. (2006). The sustainability of innovative schools as learning organizations and
     professional learning communities during standardized reform. Educational Administration
     Quarterly, 42(1), 124–156.
Goh, S., Cousins, J., & Elliott, C. (2006). Organizational learning capacity, evaluative inquiry and
     readiness for change in schools: Views and perceptions of educators. Journal of Educational
     Change, 7(4), 289–318.
Goh, S., & Richards, G. (1997). Benchmarking the learning capability of organizations. European
     Management Journal, 15(5), 575–583.
Hatcher, L. (1994). A step-by-step approach to using the SAS system for factor analysis and structural
     equation modeling. Cary, NC: SAS Institute.
Honig, M. I. (2004). Where’s the ‘up’ in bottom-up reform? Educational Policy, 18(4), 527–561.



123

J Educ Change


Honig, M. I. (2008). District central offices as learning organizations: How sociocultural and
      organizational learning theories elaborate district central office administrators’ participation in
      teaching and learning improvement efforts. American Journal of Education, 114(4), 627–664.
Hopkins, D., Harris, A., & Jackson, D. (1997). Understanding the school’s capacity for development:
      Growth states and strategies. School Leadership and Management, 17(3), 401–411.
Hord, S. (1997). Professional learning communities: Communities of continuous inquiry and improve-
      ment. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Lab.
Hubbard, L., Mehan, H., & Stein, M. K. (2006). Reform as learning: When school reform collides with
      school culture and community politics. New York: Routledge.
Huber, G. P. (1991). Organizational learning: The contributing processes and the literatures. Organization
      Science, 2(1), 88–115.
Imants, J. (2003). Two basic mechanisms for organisational learning in schools. European Journal of
      Teacher Education, 26(3), 293–311.
Johnson, S. M. (1996). Leading change: The challenge of the new superintendency. San Francisco: Jossey
      Bass.
Kline, P. (1994). An easy guide to factor analysis. New York: Routledge.
Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling (2nd ed.). New York:
      Guilford Press.
Knapp, M. (2008). How can organizational and sociocultural learning theories shed light on district
      instructional reform? American Journal of Education, 114(4), 521–539.
Leithwood, K., & Aitken, R. (1995). Making schools smarter: A system for monitoring school and district
      progress. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2006). Transformational school leadership for large-scale reform: Effects on
      students, teachers, and their classroom practices. School Effectiveness and School Improvement,
      17(2), 201–227.
Leithwood, K., Leonard, L., & Sharratt, L. (1998). Conditions fostering organizational learning in
      schools. Educational Administration Quarterly, 34(2), 243–276.
Levinthal, D. A., & March, J. G. (1993). The myopia of learning. Strategic Management Journal, 14,
      95–112.
Levitt, B., & March, J. G. (1988). Organizational learning. Annual Review of Sociology, 14, 319–340.
Louis, K. S., Marks, H. M., & Kruse, S. (1996). Teachers’ professional community in restructuring
      schools. American Educational Research Journal, 33(4), 757–798.
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. (1958). Organizations. New York: Wiley.
Marks, H. M., & Louis, K. S. (1999). Teacher empowerment and the capacity for organizational learning.
      Educational Administration Quarterly, 35(5), 707–750.
McLaughlin, M. W., & Talbert, J. E. (2006). Building school-based teacher learning communities. New
      York: Teachers College Press.
McLaughlin, M. W., Talbert, J. E., & Bascia, N. (1990). The contexts of teaching in secondary schools:
      Teachers’ realities. New York: Teachers College Press.
Moolenaar, N. M., Daly, A. J., & Sleegers, P. J. C. (2011). Ties with potential: Social network structure
      and innovative climate in Dutch schools. Teachers College Record, 113(9).
Porter, A., Polikoff, M., Goldring, E., Murphy, J., Elliott, S., & May, H. (2010). Developing a
      psychometrically sound assessment of school leadership: The VAL-ED as a case study. Educational
      Administration Quarterly, 46(2), 135–173.
Schechter, C. (2008). Organizational learning mechanisms: The meaning, measure, and implications for
      school improvement. Educational Administration Quarterly, 44(2), 155–186.
Senge, P. M. (1990). The fifth dimension: The art and practice of the learning organization. New York:
      Doubleday.
Silins, H. C., Mulford, W. R., & Zarins, S. (2002). Organizational learning and school change.
      Educational Administration Quarterly, 38(5), 613–642.
Stein, M., & Coburn, C. (2008). Architectures for learning: A comparative analysis of two urban school
      districts. American Journal of Education, 114(4), 583–626.
Stoll, L. (1999). Realising our potential: Understanding and developing capacity for lasting improvement.
      School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 10(4), 503–532.
Stoll, L. (2009). Capacity building for school improvement or creating capacity for learning? A changing
      landscape. Journal of Educational Change, 10(2/3), 115–127.
Stoll, L., Bolam, R., McMahon, A., Wallace, M., & Thomas, S. (2006). Professional learning
      communities: A review of the literature. Journal of Educational Change, 7(4), 221–258.


                                                                                             123

                                                                                         J Educ Change


Van de Ven, D., & Polley, A. (1992). Learning while innovating. Organization Science, 3(1), 92–116.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). In M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds.). Mind in society:
    The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1996). A sociocultural approach to socially shared cognition. In L. B. Resnick, J.
    M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 85–100).
    Hyattsville, MD: American Psychological Association.




 123
View publication stats

