                                                       Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535



                                                            Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                          Human Resource Management Review
                                           journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/humres




Psychological safety: A systematic review of the literature
Alexander Newman a,⁎, Ross Donohue b, Nathan Eva b
a
    Department of Management, Deakin Business School, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria 3125, Australia
b
    Department of Management, Monash Business School, Monash University, Caulﬁeld East, Victoria 3145, Australia




a r t i c l e            i n f o                          a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                          Since the concept of psychological safety was introduced, empirical research on its antecedents,
Received 30 April 2016                                    outcomes, and moderators at different levels of analysis has proliferated. Given a burgeoning
Received in revised form 3 January 2017                   body of empirical evidence, a systematic review of the psychological safety literature is war-
Accepted 7 January 2017
                                                          ranted. As well as reviewing empirical work on psychological safety, the present article high-
                                                          lights gaps in the literature and provides direction for future work. In doing so, it highlights
Keywords:                                                 the need to advance our understanding of psychological safety through the integration of key
Psychological safety                                      theoretical perspectives to explain how psychological safety develops and inﬂuences work out-
Learning
                                                          comes at different levels of analysis. Suggestions for future empirical research to advance our
Measurement issues
                                                          understanding of psychological safety are also provided.
Work outcomes
                                                                                                                  © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction

    In the contemporary business world, organizations are increasingly requiring their employees to contribute to the continuous
improvement of organizational processes and practices through behaviors that enable learning to occur (e.g., voicing new ideas,
collaborating with other members of the organization, and experimenting with new ways of doing things; Edmondson, 1999;
Nembhard & Edmondson, 2011). While such activities may potentially beneﬁt the organization, they carry certain risks for the
individual. For example, the voicing of new ideas might challenge the established way of doing things and go against the vested
interests of other members of the organization (Detert & Burris, 2007; Edmondson, Bohmer, & Pisano, 2001). In addition, exper-
imentation with new approaches in the workplace might ultimately be unsuccessful, viewed as a failure, and lead the individuals
involved to be seen in a negative light (Van Dyne & LePine, 1998). As a result, there is growing evidence to indicate that such risks
may lead employees not to contribute to learning processes, and thereby inhibit both individual and organizational learning
(Detert & Burris, 2007). The provision of a psychologically safe work environment (i.e., one in which employees feel safe to
voice ideas, willingly seek feedback, provide honest feedback, collaborate, take risks and experiment, is one way to overcome
such threats to individual and organizational learning; Edmondson, 1999). For example, in recent longitudinal work by Google's
People Analytics Unit, psychological safety was identiﬁed as the number one characteristic of successful high-performing teams
(Bergmann & Schaeppi, 2016). Psychologically safety is especially important in work environments where employee and customer
safety are paramount, such as the healthcare or aviation industries, as it has been shown to be critical in reducing employee errors
and enhancing safety (Leroy et al., 2012; Nembhard & Edmondson, 2011), and been shown to increase team and individual learn-
ing across multiple organizations (e.g., Liu, Hu, Li, Wang, & Lin, 2014; Ortega, Sanchez-Manzanares, Gil, & Rico, 2010). Given the
importance of psychologically-safe work environments to organizations, their employees and their customers, the present article
reviews prior scholarship on psychological safety.


    ⁎ Corresponding author.
      E-mail addresses: a.newman@deakin.edu.au (A. Newman), ross.donohue@monash.edu (R. Donohue), Nathan.Eva@monash.edu (N. Eva).



http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2017.01.001
1053-4822/© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

522                                          A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535


    Although several deﬁnitions of psychological safety have been proposed, the majority of studies have followed Edmondson
(1999) by deﬁning it as a shared belief amongst individuals as to whether it is safe to engage in interpersonal risk-taking
in the workplace (Edmondson, Dillon, & Roloff, 2007; Edmondson & Lei, 2014). In a psychologically safe work environment,
employees feel that their colleagues will not reject people for being themselves or saying what they think, respect each other's
competence, are interested in each other as people, have positive intentions to one another, are able engage in constructive
conﬂict or confrontation, and feel that it is safe to experiment and take risks (Edmondson, 1999). Behaviorally, psychological
safety leads employees to engage in open communication, voice their concerns, and seek greater feedback; all of which are
interpersonally risky behaviors (Pearsall & Ellis, 2011). This, in turn, has been found to inﬂuence a range of workplace outcomes
(e.g., learning and performance) at different levels of analysis (Edmondson & Lei, 2014). Although psychological safety shares
some overlap with trust, psychological safety is conceptually different as it focuses on how group members perceive a group
norm, whilst trust focuses on how one person views another.
    Since Kahn's (1990) and Edmondson's (1999) initial work on psychological safety at the individual and team levels of analysis,
empirical research on its antecedents, outcomes, and moderators has proliferated (Baer & Frese, 2003; Kark & Carmeli, 2009). By
the end of 2015 there were N83 published articles on psychological safety (78 of which are empirical), including a meta-analysis
of the relationships among psychological safety and team performance/learning (Sanner & Bunderson, 2013), a meta-analysis of
the antecedents and outcomes of psychological safety (Frazier, Fainshmidt, Klinger, Pezeshkan, & Vracheva, 2016), and a limited
review of prior work (Edmondson & Lei, 2014). Although the meta-analyses provide us with some knowledge of the antecedents,
outcomes, and boundary conditions of the relationship between psychological safety and its antecedents/outcomes, and the prior
review provides insight into extant scholarship on psychological safety, the present article builds on this previous work to make a
signiﬁcant contribution in a number of ways.
    First, by examining a larger number of published articles (83 studies compared to 25 studies for the Sanner and Bunderson meta-
analysis, 78 for the Frazier et al. meta-analysis,1 and fewer than 30 studies for Edmondson and Lei's [2014] review), we undertake a far
more systematic review of prior work, delivering a thorough analysis of the state of the literature. As well as examining prior research
on all the antecedents and outcomes of psychological safety, many of which were not the focus of prior empirical work, we offer a
greater theoretical analysis of the past literature than both the Frazier et al. and Sanner and Bunderson meta-analyses. In addition,
we examine the moderators of relations among psychological safety and its outcomes, and work in which psychological safety is
treated as a moderator. This allows us to better elucidate the complex nomological network in which psychological safety is embed-
ded. Although Edmondson and Lei's (2014) review looked at the antecedents and outcomes of psychological safety, their work did not
cover more recent articles that have made substantive theoretical and empirical advancements (e.g. Gu et al., 2013; Halbesleben &
Rathert, 2008; Liu et al., 2014; Post, 2012; Roussin & Webber, 2012; Roussin, MacLean, Rudolph, 2016; Singh, Winkel, & Selvarajan,
2013), including recent work that has begun to look at the negative aspects of psychological safety (Pearsall & Ellis, 2011).
Edmondson and Lei (2014), like Frazier et al. (2016), also did little to highlight the theoretical perspectives that have been adopted
by researchers to explain how psychological safety develops and inﬂuences work outcomes.
    We make a second important contribution by highlighting opportunities for theoretical advancement of the ﬁeld through the inte-
gration of different theoretical perspectives to explain the relationship between psychological safety and its antecedents/outcomes.
Currently, theoretical perspectives such as social learning, social exchange and social identity theories have predominantly been
used by researchers to explain the processes by which psychological safety develops and inﬂuences outcomes. Our review calls upon
researchers to utilize alternate theories such as the Conservation of Resources Theory (Hobfoll, 1989) to explain how the psychological
safety engendered through access to resources in the work environment motivates employees to invest their resources at work to help
others, and stimulate learning, growth and development. In addition, we highlight how the incorporation of person-situation theoret-
ical perspectives such as Trait Activation Theory (Tett & Guterman, 2000) might help to explain how the psychological safety climate
strengthens the behavioral manifestation of certain personality traits.
    Finally, we also provide advice for advancing empirical research. In addition to providing recommendations concerning the
measurement of psychological safety, we also call on researchers to: (1) adopt alternative methodologies to study psychological
safety, (2) conduct additional research to investigate the inﬂuence of culture on the development and deployment of psycholog-
ical safety, (3) investigate the potential negative effects of psychological safety and (4) conduct more multi- and cross-level work
to understand the relative inﬂuence of individual-, team-, and organizational-level antecedents on psychological safety.
    As well as advancing theoretical and empirical knowledge of psychological safety, our review of the literature has important prac-
tical implications for organizations. Understanding the beneﬁts that psychological safety brings to organizations, the situations in
which psychological safety is most inﬂuential, and the factors that may lead to psychological safety development, will assist leaders
in designing work environments that maximize beneﬁcial outcomes for their organizations. Psychological safety is becoming increas-
ingly important to organizational success in today's business environment, given the requirements for employees to share informa-
tion and exchange ideas with other team and organizational members in the attainment of shared goals (Edmondson & Lei, 2014). A
growing proportion of work in organizations is highly specialized and complex in nature, and therefore requires greater collaboration
among individuals than in the past. In the following sections we set out how we conducted our literature search before reviewing how
psychological safety has been deﬁned and measured, and examining its antecedents and outcomes.

  1
    We did not include unpublished work in the meta-analysis in calculating these ﬁgures. Neither did we include empirical studies that adopted the participative safety
dimension from West's (1990) team climate scale (6 studies), nor empirical studies which did not measure psychological safety, but similar concepts such as social sup-
port and trust which overlap with psychological safety. Although Edmondson and Lei's (2014) did not report the number of studies in their review, we calculated this
ﬁgure by examining the content of articles included in the review.

                                        A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535                       523


2. Literature review process

2.1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria

    We set three inclusion/exclusion criteria prior to undertaking our literature search. First, articles had to be published between
1990 (the year in which Kahn did his seminal work on psychological safety) and the end of 2015. Second, we only included stud-
ies that mentioned the words psychological safety in their title, abstract, or keywords or included psychological safety in their em-
pirical analysis. Third, we only included studies that focused on psychological safety in work environments; studies with student
or non-working adult samples were excluded. Finally, we only included articles that focused on the antecedents and outcomes of
psychological safety, or those that examined how psychological safety interacted with other variables to predict outcomes.

2.2. Literature search

   In line with best practice (Short, 2009), we searched a number of academic databases for articles (including: Web of Science,
Google Scholar, EBSCO Host, Emerald, PsycInfo, Science Direct and ProQuest) using the keywords psychological safety. In addition,
we examined the reference lists of all retrieved articles for additional studies on psychological safety and we examined all studies
that had cited the retrieved articles to locate additional literature. This led to the identiﬁcation of 83 articles for inclusion in our
review, 78 of which were empirical studies.

3. A review of the psychological safety literature

3.1. Deﬁning and measuring psychological safety

    The construct of psychological safety is grounded in the seminal work conducted by Schein and Bennis (1965) on organiza-
tional change. They described it as the extent to which individuals feel secure and conﬁdent in their ability to manage change.
Since then other researchers have explored the meaning of psychological safety in work settings. A quarter of a century after
Schein and Bennis's (1965) seminal work, Kahn's (1990, p.708) work led to renewed focus on psychological safety. In conceptu-
alizing psychological safety as an individual's perceptions as to whether he or she is comfortable to show and employ his(her)self
without fear of negative consequences to self-image, status, or career, he argued that people are more likely to feel psychologically
safe when they have trusting and supportive interpersonal relationships with work colleagues (Kahn, 1990). More recently,
Edmondson (1999) argued that psychological safety is better treated as a team-level climate and deﬁned it as the “shared belief
held by members of a team that the team is safe for interpersonal risk taking” (p. 350). This deﬁnition is divergent from Kahn's
deﬁnition that it is a perception emanating from the individual. Based on qualitative work she developed and validated a 7-item
scale to measure team psychological safety. This measure includes items that capture shared perceptions amongst team members
as to whether they believe that others will not reject members for being themselves, team members care about each other as in-
dividuals, team members have positive intentions to one another, and team members respect the competence of others.
    Our review identiﬁed 78 empirical studies, conducted over the past 25 years, which have focused on examining the anteced-
ents and outcomes of psychological safety. Among these, 740 studies utilized a quantitative survey methodology and the remain-
der employed a qualitative interview methodology. Studies adopting a qualitative interview methodology have helped to generate
detailed explanations as to why and how psychological safety develops and inﬂuences work outcomes. They have typically been
used as a basis from which to guide quantitative work. In contrast, studies adopting a quantitative survey methodology have fur-
thered our understanding of the strength of links between psychological safety and its antecedents/outcomes.

3.1.1. Individual-level measures
    Our review identiﬁed 29 studies that have measured employees' individually-held perceptions of psychological safety within
dyadic-relationships, teams, or organizations. First, examining individuals' perceptions of psychological safety in dyadic relation-
ships, studies by Tynan (2005) and Detert and Burris (2007) adapted Edmondson's (1999) team-level measure to capture self
and other psychological safety, and manager-focused psychological safety, respectively. In contrast, Roussin and Webber (2012) used
a measure of manager-focused psychological safety developed by Edmondson and Woolley (2003) and Hetzner, Gartmeier, Heid, and
Gruber (2011) constructed their own measures of supervisor- and colleague-focused psychological safety, based on items from
measures used in other studies. Second, a number of studies examining individually-held perceptions of psychological safety within
organizations have used adapted versions of Edmondson's (1999) measure, replacing the referent “team” with “organization”
(Carmeli, Brueller, & Dutton, 2009; Carmeli & Gittell, 2009; Carmeli, Reiter-Palmon, & Ziv, 2010; Carmeli & Zisu, 2009; Chen, Liao, &
Wen, 2014; Kark & Carmeli, 2009; Madjar & Ortiz-Walters, 2009). However, Singh et al. (2013) adopted a measure from Chrobot-
Mason and Aramovich (2004), De Clercq and Rius (2007) used a measure from Brown and Leigh (1996), Liang, Farh, and Farh (2012)
developed their own measure using items from other studies, including May, Gilson, and Harter (2004), and Xu and Yang (2010)
constructed their own measure.

3.1.2. Team-level measures
    Our review identiﬁed 42 studies that have measured psychological safety at the team level. Most of these studies used
Edmondson's (1999) 7-item Psychological Safety Scale or abbreviated versions of this scale. However, other researchers have

524                                  A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535


developed their own measures or adapted measures that included items from Edmondson (1999) and items from other scales
(Tucker, 2007). In contrast, Hirak, Pang, Carmeli, and Schaubroeck (2012) used a measure of unit-level psychological strength cli-
mate taken from Anderson and West (1994). In these studies, team members' perceptions of the psychological safety within the
team were aggregated to the team level, based on high intra-class correlation coefﬁcients (ICCs) between team members.

3.1.3. Organizational-level measures
    Only two prior studies have measured psychological safety at the organizational level (Baer & Frese, 2003; Carmeli, 2007).
Both studies measured employee perceptions of psychological safety within their organization, based on items adapted from
Edmondson's (1999) team-level measure, replacing the referent team with organization. Scores on the measure were then
aggregated to the organizational level based on high ICCs between organizational members. Although these studies suggest
that individual perceptions of psychological safety can be aggregated to the organizational-level, it is questionable as to whether
this is likely to be the case in all organizations, as there should be relatively high levels of agreement between all members of the
organization for an organizational climate of psychological safety to exist. As employee perceptions of psychological safety are
typically inﬂuenced by leadership and team characteristics (e.g., Carmeli et al., 2010; Chen & Tjosvold, 2012), high levels of
agreement between organizational members is unlikely, especially in larger ﬁrms where employees are unlikely to have shared
experiences of leadership and team norms. Although a climate of psychological safety might exist in smaller organizations,
whose members regularly work with each other or in organizations with strong corporate cultures, this should be conﬁrmed
through further empirical research. In general, however, we believe that psychological safety is likely to be more potent and
meaningful at the team level, rather than the organizational level.

3.1.4. Measurement critique and recommendations
    The majority of studies examining psychological safety have been conducted at the team level and almost invariably have uti-
lized Edmondson's 7-item scale (or short-form versions) to operationalize the construct. More common among studies examining
individual perceptions of psychological safety is the use of measures of similar constructs as proxies for psychological safety, or
scales developed by the authors themselves. For example, some researchers have used psychological climate scales that capture
the extent to which the climate is motivating and involving as a proxy for psychological safety (e.g., De Clercq & Rius, 2007).
The use of proxy measures, however, is problematic as the constructs they tap may diverge from Edmondson's (1999) precise
constitutive deﬁnition of psychological safety. A lack of correspondence between the conceptual deﬁnition of the construct and
the operational procedure to measure it, often results in compromised construct validity (Schwab, 1980). Moreover, all of the
studies that we reviewed, that used “in-house” measures developed by researchers themselves, applied them to test substantive
questions without ﬁrst establishing that their measures were psychometrically sound. Such measures may lack validity and there-
fore have the potential to result in spurious ﬁndings (DeVellis, 2003).
    In contrast, Edmondson's (1999) 7-item measure was developed based on rigorous scale construction protocols and has been
subjected to extensive validation tests, which have invariably shown that the measure has strong content, criterion, and construct
validity. In addition, Edmondson's (1999) measure of psychological safety has consistently been found to be reliable across diverse
samples as evidenced by the fact that all of the studies that we reviewed, that used her 7-item measure, reported very good in-
ternal consistency reliability estimates.
    In our view, the continued use of multiple measures of psychological safety is likely to hinder advancement in the ﬁeld be-
cause the results of different versions of the construct measure are not readily comparable (Hawcroft & Milfont, 2010). As a con-
sequence, we believe that our understanding of psychological safety would be greatly improved if there was consensus regarding
the most valid and reliable measures. In light of the strong psychometric properties of Edmondson's (1999) 7-item scale, which
suggest that it is isomorphic (similar in meaning) at different levels, and the fact that nearly all of the extant studies examining
psychological safety at the team or organizational levels applied both Edmondson's (1999) deﬁnition of the construct and her
measure (changing the referent to “organization” in the latter), we recommend it as the measure of choice for use in future stud-
ies in preference to proxy or “in-house” measures of psychological safety.
    Finally, while there have been studies conducted at different levels of analysis, it is also the case that there has been a paucity
of cross-level and multilevel psychological safety research. The scarcity of such studies not only limits our understanding of the
nomological net of psychological safety, that is inherently mixed-level involving micro and macro antecedents and outcomes
(which we discuss below in Section 5), but also limits our capacity to understand whether psychological safety varies across
organizations, as well as across teams within organizations. The study by Edmondson and Mogelof (2005) was the only study
identiﬁed in our review that attempted to address this question. They examined team- and organizational-level variance in psy-
chological safety via data from 26 innovation teams, nested in 7 organizations (i.e., data from multiple teams and organizations),
collected over 3 waves. Edmondson and Mogelof (2005) found that there were team-level differences in relation to psychological
safety and that organizations differed in psychological safety at the same time. These ﬁndings align with the mixed-level view of
psychological safety, however, we believe that further multilevel research is required to determine whether the ﬁndings from this
single study are replicable.

3.2. Antecedents of psychological safety and psychological safety as a mediator

   Our review identiﬁed 44 empirical studies that have examined the antecedents of psychological safety at different levels of
analysis. This work has predominantly treated psychological safety as a mediator (38 of these studies) to explain how supportive

                                      A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535                              525


organizational practices, supportive leadership behaviors, relationship networks, team characteristics and individual/team differ-
ences inﬂuence workplace outcomes at the individual, team and organizational-levels through the development of psychological
safety. In examining these issues, researchers have begun to utilize diverse theoretical perspectives including social learning the-
ory, social exchange theory, social identity theory, and status characteristics theory.

3.2.1. Supportive leadership behaviors
    Growing research at both the individual and team level has examined the effects of supportive leadership behaviors on work
outcomes through psychological safety. For example, at the individual level empirical work has established that leader inclusive-
ness (Bienefeld & Grote, 2014; Carmeli et al., 2010), support (May et al., 2004), trustworthiness (Madjar & Ortiz-Walters, 2009),
openness (Detert & Burris, 2007) and behavioral integrity (Palanski & Vogelgesang, 2011) strongly inﬂuence employee percep-
tions of psychological safety, which in turn, drive employee outcomes including voice behaviors, involvement in creative work,
job performance and engagement. Similarly, at the team level employees' collective perceptions of support and coaching
forwarded by the team leader (Edmondson, 1999; Roberto, 2002), leader inclusiveness (Hirak et al., 2012; Nembhard &
Edmondson, 2006), trust in the leader (Li & Tan, 2012; Schaubroeck, Lam, & Peng, 2011), and the behavioral integrity of the leader
(Leroy et al., 2012) have been found to foster team-level outcomes such as team learning behavior, team performance, engage-
ment in quality improvement work, and reduction in errors amongst team members through the development of psychological
safety. Other work has found that positive leadership styles such as transformational leadership (Nemanich & Vera, 2009), ethical
leadership (Walumbwa & Schaubroeck, 2009), change-oriented leadership (Ortega, Van den Bossche, Sanchez-Manzanares, Rico,
& Gil, 2014) and shared leadership (Liu et al., 2014) are positively and strongly related to such outcomes as employee voice be-
havior, team learning, and individual learning through the mediating mechanism of psychological safety.
    Finally, research has established that leaders who value participation, people, and production use dyadic discovery methods
rather than group-based discovery methods (Roussin, 2008; Wong, Tjosvold, & Lu, 2010), and an improvement orientation man-
agement style (Halbesleben & Rathert, 2008), are able to foster high levels of psychological safety. In explaining why a signiﬁcant
relationship may exist between supportive leadership behaviors and psychological safety, prior research has typically relied on
key tenets from social learning theory (Bandura, 1977). Based on this theory, researchers have argued that by listening,
forwarding support, and providing clear and consistent directions to subordinates, the leader is able to model to subordinates
that it is safe to take risks and engage in honest communication (e.g., Hirak et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2014; Nemanich & Vera,
2009; Walumbwa & Schaubroeck, 2009). However, other researchers have argued that social exchange processes may underlie
the relationship between supportive leadership and psychological safety, arguing that when followers are supported by the leader,
they will reciprocate with supportive behaviors themselves, creating a psychologically safe environment for the rest of their team
(e.g. Schaubroeck et al., 2011). While we acknowledge that the social exchange process may increase psychological safety, we
believe it is likely that the effects will be stronger and more enduring, when psychological safety is built through learning and
emulating these behaviors from the leader, rather than displaying them at a point in time in exchange for certain leadership
behaviors.

3.2.2. Supportive organizational practices
    At the individual level, there is growing evidence that supportive organizational practices are positively related to employee
work outcomes such as organizational commitment and job performance as they heighten perceptions of psychological safety.
For example, research has found that employee perceptions of organizational support (Carmeli & Zisu, 2009), access to mentoring
(Chen et al., 2014), and diversity practices (Singh et al., 2013) foster work outcomes through the mediating mechanism of psy-
chological safety. Drawing on a sample of 191 medical professionals in an Israeli medical clinic, supportive organizational practices
were found to foster psychological safety through social learning processes, similar to that of supportive leadership behaviors
(Carmeli & Zisu, 2009). However, Singh et al. (2013) relied on social identity theory to argue that the implementation of
workplace diversity practices fosters psychological safety via employee identiﬁcation with the organization in the context of US mid-
sized production ﬁrms (N = 165). Both studies utilized a survey design, with Singh et al. (2013) using the 3-item Chrobot-Mason
and Aramovich (2004) measure of psychological safety, rather than the well validated Edmondson (1999) 7-item measure.

3.2.3. Relationship networks
    Growing research at the individual, team, and organizational levels has looked at social support and the social capital (resources)
inherent in relationship networks as key determinants of psychological safety. At the individual level, research has established that re-
warding co-worker relationships and the extent to which members of the organization interact with one another on an interpersonal
basis, inﬂuence individual learning and engagement through the mediating mechanism of psychological safety (Carmeli & Gittell, 2009;
Carmeli et al., 2009; May et al., 2004). Similarly, at the team level, researchers have found that relationship networks, and the social sup-
port and resources inherent in such networks, promote psychological safety and contribute to team learning, performance, and inno-
vation. For example, researchers have found that the key drivers of psychological safety and its outcomes are: the level of prior
interaction between; and familiarity among, team members (Roberto, 2002); the quality of social relationships between team members
as measured by trust; network ties and collective thinking (Gu, Wang, & Wang, 2013; Huang & Jiang, 2012; Schulte, Cohen, & Klein,
2012); high quality relationships between team members and external parties (Brueller & Carmeli, 2011); and membership of the
inner-circle (Burris, Rodgers, Mannix, Hendron, & Oldroyd, 2009). Finally, at the organizational level Carmeli (2007) found that the
strength of social networks between members of the organization was positively related to their ability to learn from failure through
the development of psychological safety. Although most studies in this area did not explicitly address why strong relationship networks,

526                                     A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535


and the social resources inherent in such networks, foster psychological safety, a small number of researchers have proposed that social
relationships may engender psychological safety through social learning processes (e.g. Carmeli, 2007; Gu et al., 2013).

3.2.4. Team characteristics
     At both the individual and team level, research has begun to examine how individually-held and collective perceptions of team char-
acteristics inﬂuence perceptions of psychological safety. For example, at the individual level researchers have found that employee per-
ceptions of similarity in systems understanding among team members (Bendoly, 2014), and a continuous quality improvement climate
in teams (Rathert, Ishqaidef, & May, 2009), inﬂuence project performance and organizational commitment respectively through higher
levels of psychological safety within the team. At the team level, researchers have found that characteristics such as shared team rewards
(Chen & Tjosvold, 2012), formal team structures (Bresman & Zellmer-Bruhn, 2013; Bunderson & Boumgarden, 2010), and team engage-
ment in boundary work (buffering, spanning, and reinforcement) (Faraj & Yan, 2009) are positively associated with higher levels of team
psychological safety. However, Chandrasekaran and Mishra (2012) found that only team autonomy inﬂuenced psychological safety
when the project goals and processes of the team were aligned with their broader organizational goals and when there were low degrees
of relative exploration (i.e., the team focused on reﬁning existing products and processes rather than seeking to develop new products
and processes). Contrary to what they expected, Lau and Murnighan (2005) found that the presence of strong faultlines within teams
(i.e., the existence of sub-groups with non-overlapping demographic characteristics) led to greater psychological safety amongst team
members. They argued that this may have resulted from generalization of the positive social effects within strong faultline groups to
the entire team. Finally, O'Neill (2009) found that when team members were collectively responsible for bad investment decisions, psy-
chological safety gave them the courage to admit failure, whereas when they were individually responsible, psychological safety escalat-
ed their commitment to bad investment decisions. They argued that this is due to the fact that, when there is collective responsibility,
team members are less motivated to salvage a project that may fail. Although growing work has examined the inﬂuence of team char-
acteristics on psychological safety there has been limited incorporation of theory to explain the effects of such characteristics.

3.2.5. Individual and team differences
    Researchers have also found that individual and team differences such as adherence to co-worker norms and self-conscious-
ness (May et al., 2004), status differences (Bienefeld & Grote, 2014; Nembhard & Edmondson, 2006) and team members' sequen-
tial cognitive style (i.e., thinking in a logical sequential routine) (Post, 2012) are associated with psychological safety. For example,
utilizing perspectives from status characteristics theory, prior research has found that an individual's perceived status within the
team (Bienefeld & Grote, 2014), and the professionally-derived status of the team (Nembhard & Edmondson, 2006), leads to out-
comes such as the willingness of individuals to speak up and team engagement through enhancing psychological safety. This work
suggests that the higher the status of the employee or the team, the more safe individuals will feel to speak up and share ideas.

3.3. Outcomes of psychological safety

    Our review identiﬁed 62 empirical studies that focused on the outcomes of psychological safety at different levels of analysis.
Given that the early conceptual development of psychological safety was grounded in the organizational learning literature, early
empirical work on psychological safety typically focused mainly on learning and performance outcomes (e.g., Edmondson, 1999).
Research has also examined the relationship among psychological safety and outcomes such as innovation, creativity, employee
attitudes, communication, knowledge-sharing, and voice behaviors. Research examining the relationship among psychological
safety and its outcomes has begun to integrate perspectives from social learning theory, social information processing theory, so-
cial identiﬁcation theory, and social exchange theory (Carmeli, 2007; Chen et al., 2014; De Clercq & Rius, 2007; Liu et al., 2014;
Schaubroeck et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2013).

3.3.1. Communication, knowledge sharing and voice behavior
    At the individual and team level, psychological safety has been linked to communication outcomes such as greater reporting of
treatment errors and more interpersonal communication (Leroy et al., 2012; Peltokorpi, 2004), as well as greater knowledge sharing
among team members (Mu & Gnyawali, 2003; Siemsen, Roth, Balasubramanian, & Anand, 2009; Xu & Yang, 2010; Zhang, Fang, Wei, &
Chen, 2010). Psychological safety within dyadic relationships and teams has also been shown to lead to more voice behavior among
employees (Bienefeld & Grote, 2014; Detert & Burris, 2007; Liang et al., 2012; Tynan, 2005), and a reduction in silence behaviors
(Brinsﬁeld, 2013). For example, Tynan (2005) found that individuals high in other-psychological safety (i.e., they believe others
feel safe in their relationships), were more likely to raise disagreement, give candid feedback, and point out errors to their supervisor.

3.3.2. Learning behavior
    A growing body of research has found positive associations among employee perceptions of psychological safety and learning be-
havior at different levels of analysis. For example, researchers have established positive links between psychological safety and learning
behavior at both the individual (Liu et al., 2014) and team levels (Bstieler & Hemmert, 2010; Ortega et al., 2010; Roberto, 2002;
Stalmeijer, Gijselaers, Wolfhagen, Harendza, & Scherpbier, 2007; Van den Bossche, Gijselaers, Segers, Kirschner, 2006; Wong et al.,
2010). Psychological safety has also been shown to assist individuals to learn from failure (Carmeli, 2007; Carmeli & Gittell, 2009). In
their meta-analytical work, Sanner and Bunderson (2013) found the correlation between team psychological safety and team learning
to be 0.42 (95% CI = 0.05 to 0.85). In examining the link between psychological safety and learning, researchers have begun to adopt
perspectives from the social learning and social information processing literature (e.g., Carmeli, 2007; Liu et al., 2014). This literature

                                    A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535                        527


suggests that through signaling it is acceptable to take risks, experiment and voice their ideas and concerns to team members, a psy-
chologically safe work environment will foster team and individual learning.

3.3.3. Performance, innovation and creativity
     As well as directly and strongly inﬂuencing performance at the individual (Singh et al., 2013) and team levels (Schaubroeck et
al., 2011), psychological safety has been found to inﬂuence performance indirectly through facilitating learning behavior at both
the individual (Li & Tan, 2012; Li & Yan, 2009) and team (Brueller & Carmeli, 2011; Edmondson, 1999; Hirak et al., 2012; Huang &
Jiang, 2012; Kostopoulos & Bozionelos, 2011; Ortega et al., 2014) level. In their meta-analysis, Sanner and Bunderson (2013)
found the indirect effect of psychological safety on team performance, through team learning, to be 0.17 (95% CI = 0.14 to
0.20). Other work has established that alternative mechanisms such as team turnover also explain the effect of psychological safe-
ty on team performance (Chandrasekaran & Mishra, 2012). Finally, at the organizational-level, Baer and Frese (2003) found that
employees' collective perceptions of psychological safety were strongly and positively related to ﬁrm performance, as measured
by return on assets and goal achievement.
     In addition to performance, there is growing evidence of a link between employee perceptions of psychological safety within
the organization and their creativity (Carmeli et al., 2010; Kark & Carmeli, 2009). Palanski and Vogelgesang (2011) also found ev-
idence of a positive link between employee perceptions of team psychological safety and both creative thinking and risk-taking. At
the team-level, research has found that team psychological safety is strongly and positively related to innovation in R&D teams
(Gu et al., 2013; Post, 2012), manufacturing process innovation performance (Lee, Swink, & Pandejpong, 2011) and knowledge
creation (Choo, Linderman, & Schroeder, 2007). Kessel, Kratzer, and Schultz (2012) found that team psychological safety was pos-
itively related to creative team performance and this relationship was mediated by the sharing of two types of knowledge: infor-
mation and know-how. However, Kayes (2006) found no evidence that psychological safety led to higher levels of critical thinking
within teams. Researchers have argued that psychological safety may inﬂuence performance outcomes through fostering social
exchange between the employee and organization, and enhancing the extent to which the employee identiﬁes with the organi-
zation (Schaubroeck et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2013; Singh & Winkel, 2012).

3.3.4. Employee attitudes
    At the individual level, a number of studies have established a strong and positive link between psychological safety and the
work attitudes of employees such as organizational commitment (Chen et al., 2014; De Clercq & Rius, 2007; Rathert et al., 2009),
work engagement (May et al., 2004; Nembhard & Edmondson, 2006) and positive attitudes towards teamwork (Ulloa & Adams,
2004). In examining the link between psychological safety and employee work attitudes, researchers have typically relied on so-
cial exchange theory to explain how the psychological safety engendered by supportive practices leads employees to reciprocate
in the form of desired work attitudes (Chen et al., 2014; De Clercq & Rius, 2007).

3.3.5. Other outcomes
    At the individual-level, perceptions of psychological safety within the team have also been shown to increase the likelihood
that employees will engage in “work arounds”, deﬁned as work procedures undertaken to deal with blocks in workﬂow
(Halbesleben & Rathert, 2008), and lead them reﬂect on events at work (Hetzner et al., 2011). Roussin and Webber (2012)
established that employee perceptions of psychological safety in dyadic relationships with their manager were positively related
to their initial perceived trustworthiness of new team members. They argued this resulted from the fact that psychological safety
would encourage team members to engage in the social risk taking involved in extending initial trust to a new co-worker. At the
team level, psychological safety has been linked to other outcomes such as lower quality relationships and task conﬂict (Wilkens
& London, 2006), more feedback giving and seeking behavior (Wilkens & London, 2006), and frontline system improvements
(Tucker, 2007). Tucker, Nembhard, and Edmondson (2007) also found that team psychological safety was associated with the
use of internally focused learning activities that provide employees with the knowledge required to adapt and implement new
practices in their unit, and had a subsequent impact on the implementation success of improvement projects. Finally,
Edmondson et al. (2001) found that psychological safety positively inﬂuenced the successful implementation of new technology.

3.4. Factors moderating psychological safety antecedents and outcomes

    A limited number of studies have focused on factors that may interact with psychological safety to predict various outcomes at
different levels of analysis. In their meta-analysis, Sanner and Bunderson (2013) found that psychological safety was more strong-
ly related to team learning and performance in task environments that beneﬁt from learning. For example, they found that asso-
ciation between psychological safety and team learning to be stronger in task environments where there were higher creativity
requirements (β = 0.39, p b 0.01), sense-making requirements (β = 0.54, p b 0.01), complexity (β = 0.63, p b 0.01), and social
contact/impact (β = 0.50, p b 0.01). Moreover, Sanner and Bunderson (2013) found that the association between psychological
safety and team performance was stronger in task environments where there were higher creativity requirements (β = 0.69,
p b 0.01), sense-making requirements (β = 0.31, p b 0.01) and complexity (β = 0.73, p b 0.01). Our review also identiﬁed
work that examined other boundary conditions on psychological safety-outcome relationships at different levels of analysis. At
the individual-level, Roussin and Webber (2012) found that organizational identiﬁcation moderated the relationship between
manager-focused psychological safety and initial perceived trustworthiness of new team members, such that the relationship
was positive when organizational identiﬁcation was low, and non-signiﬁcant when organizational identiﬁcation was high. In

528                                   A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535


explaining these results, they argued that employees with higher organizational identiﬁcation are less likely to be inﬂuenced by
team psychological safety when determining initial perceptions of trustworthiness in new co-workers as they shift their cognitive
focus to their valued relationship with the organization. Liang et al. (2012) found that psychological safety was more strongly re-
lated to promotive and prohibitive voice behavior, for employees high in felt obligation, and that it was more weakly related to
promotive voice for employees high in organization-based self-esteem. At the team level, Siemsen et al. (2009) found that the
relationship between psychological safety and knowledge-sharing was positively moderated by the level of conﬁdence that em-
ployees have in what they know. Finally, Kostopoulos and Bozionelos (2011) established that task conﬂict moderated the relation-
ship between team psychological safety and exploitative learning (they associated with activities that assist the team to reﬁne and
utilize existing knowledge and skills), in such a way that the relationship was stronger when there was higher task conﬂict.

3.5. Psychological safety as a moderator

    Growing work has examined the moderating effects of psychological safety on different relationships at the individual, team and or-
ganizational levels of analysis. At an individual level, Tangirala, Kamdar, Venkataramani, and Parke (2013) found that when individuals
perceived their environment to be psychological safe, this weakened the negative relationship between achievement orientation and
role conceptualization. At the team level, Martins, Schilpzand, Kirkman, Ivanaj, and Ivanaj (2013) found that when psychological safety
was low, expertise diversity had a stronger negative relationship with team performance. In contrast, when psychological safety was
high, team expertise diversity had a stronger positive relationship with team performance. Gibson and Gibbs (2006) found that when
psychological safety was high, the negative effects of geographical dispersion, electronic dependence, dynamic structure, and national
diversity on team innovation were mitigated. Pearsall and Ellis (2011) revealed that psychological safety moderated the relationship be-
tween utilitarianism and unethical outcomes, such that members of teams high in psychological safety were more likely to engage in
unethical behaviors compared to those from teams that were low in psychological safety. Bradley, Postlethwaite, Klotz, Hamdani, and
Brown (2012) found that task conﬂict only inﬂuenced team performance when team psychological safety was high. Leroy et al.
(2012) established that the relationship between team priority of safety and reporting of treatment errors was stronger for teams higher
in psychological safety. Finally, Kirkman, Cordery, Mathieu, Rosen, and Kukenberger (2013) found that psychological safety moderated
the curvilinear relationship between nationality diversity and performance, such that the relationship was more positive at the higher
end, and less positive at the lower end, for teams high in psychological safety.
    At the organizational level, Baer and Frese (2003) established that at high levels of psychological safety, the relationship be-
tween process innovativeness (i.e., the use of advanced manufacturing techniques) and proﬁtability (i.e., return on assets), was
positive, whereas at low levels of organizational psychological safety, the relationship was negative.

3.6. Summary

    In Fig. 1 we synthesize key observations from our review to provide an overview of the nomological network of variables to
which psychological safety is related.
    Our review of the literature led to a number of key observations. As can be seen in Fig. 1, although psychological safety is a
multilevel construct, our review suggests that it is likely to be more potent and meaningful at the team level, as opposed to
the organizational level, unless the organization is small. This may be the reason why few studies have been conducted at the
organizational level. In addition, as can be seen in Fig. 1, most of the antecedents of psychological safety, at the individual and
team levels, can be grouped under the rubric of supportive environments (i.e., supportive leadership, supportive relationships
with colleagues, and supportive organizational practices). In the majority of studies we reviewed, psychological safety was the
mechanism through which the effects of these supportive environments were transmitted to desirable outcomes, such as in-
creased knowledge sharing, engagement, creativity, innovation, and ultimately performance. Our review also established that psy-
chological safety is a valuable resource, especially important in hazardous work contexts where speaking up and providing
feedback is imperative in order to reduce errors and improve safety. As shown in Fig. 1, across all levels, psychological safety ap-
pears to be predictive of learning and performance outcomes.
    As evident in Fig. 1, task-related factors, such as the presence of task conﬂict or strong task environments that motivate learning, am-
plify the positive effects of psychological safety on performance and exploitative learning (respectively). At the individual level, employ-
ee personal beliefs and attitudes (e.g., organizational identiﬁcation and felt obligation) appear to strengthen the relationships among
psychological safety and positive outcomes, such as communication and admitting errors. As can be seen in Fig. 1 our review also indi-
cates that the extant research has focused inordinately on testing the moderators of psychological safety-outcome relationships, while
examination of the boundary conditions of antecedent-psychological safety relationships has been neglected.
    As displayed in Fig. 1, psychological safety appears to moderate other antecedent-outcome relationships. For example, high
levels of psychological safety were found to intensify the positive relationship between team expertise diversity and team perfor-
mance and mitigate the negative effects of geographical dispersion, electronic dependence, dynamic structure, and national diver-
sity on team innovation.
    Although our review revealed that growing empirical work has been conducted on the antecedents and outcomes of psycho-
logical safety, there has been limited integration of theory to explain the processes by which psychological safety develops and
inﬂuences work outcomes. Our review highlighted two relevant theoretical approaches that have begun to attract attention in
the psychological safety literature, both of which offer a unique perspective of the positive work outcomes derived from psycho-
logical safety. The ﬁrst stream invokes social learning theory to argue that supportive practices and relationships at work foster

                                     A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535                         529




                             Fig. 1. Network of key variables related to psychological safety based on literature review.




psychological safety and inﬂuence outcomes such as learning, performance, innovation, and creativity. These occur through facil-
itation of information sharing, employee voice, feedback seeking, and experimentation (e.g., Carmeli, 2007; Liu et al., 2014).
    The second stream utilizes the social exchange theory to argue that supportive practices and relationships at work may enhance psy-
chological safety and lead employees to reciprocate in the form of positive work outcomes (e.g., Chen et al., 2014; De Clercq & Rius,
2007). While some have argued that psychological safety and subsequent positive outcomes are learned behaviors by employees, others
have argued that they are conducted in exchange for positive behaviors shown towards them. Although these theories may provide ex-
planations for links among psychological safety and its antecedents/outcomes, they do not provide a detailed and holistic understanding
of the underlying processes through which psychological safety develops and inﬂuences workplace outcomes. Nor do they assist us in
understanding the boundary conditions of the relationship between psychological safety and its antecedents/outcomes. Our review
also highlighted a general reliance on quantitative research methodologies in the area of psychological safety and limited exploration
of alternative methodologies. Finally, our review identiﬁed a lack of longitudinal research on the dynamic processes by which psycho-
logical safety develops and inﬂuences work outcomes. Among extant studies, only Schulte et al. (2012) employed a panel design
where both antecedents and outcomes were measured at all points in time.

4. Agenda for future research

4.1. Opportunities for theoretical advancement

    As highlighted in our review of prior research, the majority of studies of psychological safety have focused on its antecedents
(e.g., supportive leadership behavior) and/or its outcomes. This research offers little theoretical understanding of the processes by
which psychological safety inﬂuences positive and negative work outcomes or the boundary conditions that affect these relationships. In
light of these limitations, we highlight two potential theoretical frameworks that researchers may draw on to examine these issues.

4.1.1. Conservation of resources theory
    Our review highlights the need for a more holistic understanding of the underlying processes through which psychological
safety develops and inﬂuences workplace outcomes. Therefore, we encourage researchers to integrate perspectives from the Con-
servation of Resources (COR) theory (Hobfoll, 1989). We believe that the COR theory provides a succinct explanation as to how

530                                 A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535


resources in the work environment, that have been identiﬁed in our review of the literature (e.g., supportive organizational prac-
tices and relationship networks), positively inﬂuence work outcomes. Moreover, COR theory provides an explanation for the de-
velopment of psychological safety and how both individual and team resource investment and depletion may explain the
psychological safety – work outcomes relationships.
    The core tenet of COR theory is that individuals seek to gain resources to protect against resource loss (Hobfoll, 1989). Re-
sources may include social support, rewards, autonomy, or job security and can either be gained or taken away by the organiza-
tion, supervisor, team, or individuals. According to the 1st and 3rd corollaries of COR theory (Hobfoll, 2011), individuals with
access to greater resources (e.g., relationship networks found within a psychologically safe work environment) are less vulnerable
to resource loss (depletion) and are more capable of orchestrating resource gain (investment) through using their existing re-
sources. By obtaining these additional resources, individuals are better equipped to meet their work demands and achieve their
work goals (Halbesleben, Neveu, Paustian-Underdahl, & Westman, 2014). For example, when provided with adequate support
in the workplace, employees will feel psychologically safe to share their ideas and knowledge with others in the workplace in
the belief that this will assist them in obtaining further resources (e.g., positive feedback and suggestions from others in the work-
place). This, in turn, will enable them to attain their work goals and is likely to foster an environment where individual and team
learning occur and performance improves.
    Based on this theory we present a conceptual framework in Fig. 2 to highlight the mechanisms by which psychological safety
develops and inﬂuences work outcomes. As can be seen in Fig. 2, supportive job resources engender a climate of psychological
safety, conferring protection from resource loss, which in turn is associated with negative individual outcomes such stress and
strain, as well as undesirable team outcomes such as conﬂict (the health impairment pathway). A climate of psychological safety
also appears to distinguish high performing teams from their counterparts, as members in such teams are motivated to invest re-
sources (e.g., through communication and knowledge sharing), which in turn leads to positive work outcomes such as learning,
innovation, and performance at the individual- and team-level (the motivational pathway).


4.1.2. Trait activation theory
    We also call on researchers to incorporate prominent person-situation theoretical perspectives, such as the trait activation
theory (TAT) (Tett & Guterman, 2000), to further our understanding of the boundary conditions on the relationships among
psychological safety and work outcomes. According to Tett and Guterman (2000, p. 398), “the behavioral expression of a trait re-
quires arousal of the trait by trait-relevant situational cues”. TAT suggests that the inﬂuence of personality traits may depend on
inducements offered by the context (situational cues), and therefore provides an explanation as to how organizational climates,
such as psychological safety climate, might interact with the personality traits of the employee to predict their work behaviors
and attitudes. Based on TAT we argue that a climate of psychological safety would amplify the positive effects of an individual's
predisposition to act proactively, embodied in personality traits such as extraversion, proactive personality, and learning goal
orientation. This would lead them to be more likely to engage in relevant work behaviors such as voice behavior or information
sharing in environments, with high levels of psychological safety, as such an environment provides cues and opportunities for
expression of their traits. Prior work has drawn on TAT to examine how organizational or team climates arouse individuals to
engage in more positive behaviors at work when they possess certain personality traits (e.g., Byrne, Stoner, Thompson, &
Hockwarter, 2005).
    Together COR theory and TAT explain the processes by which psychological safety inﬂuences outcomes and the ways in which
personality traits and psychological safety may interact to inﬂuence outcomes. We call upon researchers to draw on such perspec-
tives in future studies in order to advance our understanding of psychological safety.




                                      Fig. 2. An integrative theoretical framework of psychological safety.

                                               A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535                                                    531


4.2. Opportunities for empirical advancement

    In the following sections, we develop an agenda for advancing empirical research. As well as (1) providing recommendations
around the measurement of psychological safety; we call for (2) the greater use of alternative methodologies to study psycholog-
ical safety; (3) additional research to investigate the inﬂuence of culture on employee and team responses to psychological safety;
(4) greater investigation of the potential negative effects of psychological safety; and (5) more multi-level and cross-level work to
understand the relative inﬂuence of individual, team and organizational-level antecedents on psychological safety. Research in
these areas will have important practical implications through enabling managers to design work environments that are condu-
cive to the development of psychological safety and maximize the beneﬁts of psychological safety to the organization.

4.2.1. Measurement of psychological safety
    While considerable empirical work on psychological safety has relied on the use of a cross-sectional quantitative survey meth-
odology, limited longitudinal research has been conducted. Longitudinal studies, focusing on newcomer socialization in teams, in-
volving multiple waves of data collection and the application of latent growth modeling (Duncan & Duncan, 2004) would afford
the opportunity to systematically examine the dynamic nature of psychological safety, especially individuals' and teams' develop-
mental trajectories in psychological safety, and inter-individual and team variability in its development. Research along these lines
would be insightful as we know very little about the aetiology and temporal change of psychological safety in teams.
    As well as using consensus models to measure psychological safety at the team and organizational-levels of analysis, re-
searchers might consider measuring the degree of consensus between team members as to psychological safety within their dy-
adic relationships and map these using social network methods as network ties (Roussin et al., 2016). This will allow for a better
understanding of how psychological safety dynamics within sub-teams inﬂuence learning and performance outcomes within
teams, and address Roussin et al.'s (2016) concerns that the use of consensus models has led researchers to ignore team contexts
in which members do not share similar beliefs about psychological safety.
    In addition, we also call on researchers to investigate factors that inﬂuence psychological safety strength (i.e., the degree of con-
sensus or agreement of individuals' perceptions of psychological safety within a team or organization; see Schneider, Salvaggio,
and Subirats [2002]).2 Although researchers have justiﬁed conceptualizing psychological safety as a team- or organization-level
construct through measuring the degree of agreement between members, they have yet to examine the inﬂuence of psychological
safety strength on team or organizational outcomes, or identify the factors that predict psychological safety strength. These are
surprising omissions given the topic of team climate strength has gained increasing attention in the literature (González-Romá,
Fortes-Ferreira, & Peiró, 2009; Schneider et al., 2002). We might expect variables such as team or organization size, geographic
dispersion, and diversity among team and organizational members to inﬂuence the degree of psychological safety strength. Re-
searchers might also examine whether psychological safety strength changes across the different stages of team development,
and whether this construct moderates the relationships between team psychological safety and its outcomes.

4.2.2. Alternative methodologies to study psychological safety
    Given the skew towards a quantitative survey methodology in extant research, researchers should also consider using alterna-
tive methodologies in future work to gain a more holistic understanding as to how psychological safety develops and inﬂuences
work outcomes. In addition to using qualitative interviews, which have been adopted in prior research to gain a deeper under-
standing as to how psychological safety develops within teams and individuals, researchers might consider using observational
techniques to gauge levels of psychological safety within a team or dyadic context. This may be done through looking at the ver-
bal and non-verbal communication people use when interacting with one another. More speciﬁcally, face reading software might
be used to determine the extent to which people seem comfortable when talking with one another and their willingness to en-
gage in interpersonal risk taking.

4.2.3. Cultural inﬂuences on psychological safety
    As recommended by Edmondson and Lei (2014), greater work might be undertaken to ascertain whether psychological safety
has a stronger inﬂuence on outcomes for individuals, teams, and organizations operating in different cultural settings. At present
most of the research investigating the inﬂuence of psychological safety in the workplace has been conducted in Western cultures,
such as the US which are characterized by low levels of collectivism, power distance, and uncertainty avoidance (Hofstede, 2001).
In such cultures individuals are more likely to be direct in voicing new ideas and engage in experimentation, without the presence
of psychological safety. As a result, the inﬂuence of psychological safety on work outcomes such as learning, performance, and
creativity might be expected to be more pronounced for individuals and teams embedded in organizations operating in cultures
characterized by higher levels of collectivism, power distance, and uncertainty avoidance. In such cultures speaking out or
experimenting with new ideas is less common, as engaging in such behavior leads to more social costs than in Western cultures
and causes individuals to lose face and risk being ostracized by other group members (Friedman, Chi, & Liu, 2006; Liu, Zhu, &
Yang, 2010). Examining psychological safety in these contexts will allow a more robust test of the predictive validity of psycho-
logical safety as the variance between members' perceptions of psychological safety may be higher than that of Western culture
where there are minimal social costs to speaking out.

  2
    Please note this deﬁnition of strength as used in the team climate literature does not refer to the mean level of psychological safety within a group but the strength of
consensus or agreement between members of a group.

532                                   A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535


4.2.4. Negative effects of psychological safety
    There has been an inordinate focus in prior empirical work on examining the positive outcomes of psychological safety. Re-
cently, based on pervasive and counter-theoretical ﬁndings in some areas of management research, Pierce and Aguinis (2013)
proposed a meta-theoretical principal they refer to as the too-much-of-a-good-thing effect (TMGT effect). Essentially, the TMGT ef-
fect occurs when levels of typically beneﬁcial antecedents reach tipping points, after which their relations with desired outcomes
shift from being linear and positive to curvilinear (inverted U-shape) and negative. Evidence of the TMGT effect has been found
for assertiveness in terms of its relationship with leadership effectiveness (Ames & Flynn, 2007) and for conscientious with regard
to its association with performance (Whetzel, McDaniel, Yost, & Kim, 2010). Pierce and Aguinis (2013) argued that other manage-
ment constructs are likely to have non-monotonic relations with desired outcomes and therefore we consider here the possibility
that too much psychological safety within a team could lead to detrimental outcomes.
    In the extant psychological safety literature, only one prior study by Pearsall and Ellis (2011) has highlighted its potential negative
inﬂuence, demonstrating that teams high in psychological safety are more likely to engage in unethical behavior. More speciﬁcally,
Pearsall and Ellis (2011) argue that teams high in utilitarianism may utilize the psychological safety of their environment to choose
the most beneﬁcial option when making decisions, even if that option may be unethical. Once the unethical possibility is raised as a
potential option, other team members may feel willing to support the idea, given a psychological safe climate within the team. These
ﬁndings suggest that psychological safety might not always have a positive inﬂuence on team and organizational-level outcomes.
    Hence, we also call on researchers to explore possible negative consequences of “too much” psychological safety at the individual,
team, and organizational levels and potential curvilinear effects of psychological safety on outcomes at different levels of analysis. For
example, psychological safety generally encourages change and disruption to the status quo, which can carry a certain degree of risk
for individuals (e.g., “a damaged reputation if the initiative fails or disapproval if it is seen as inappropriate or threatening” [Morrison
& Phelps, 1999, p. 405]). In addition, recent work has shown that high levels of trust can lead to lower levels of team performance due
to lower levels of monitoring within autonomous teams (Langfred, 2004). Thus, we expect psychological safety to have a negative
inﬂuence on team learning and performance for teams that have high autonomy within their organization.

4.2.5. Interactive effects of individual, team and organizational-level antecedents on psychological safety
    There has been limited investigation as to how individual-, team-, and organizational-level factors may interact to inﬂuence psy-
chological safety, and subsequently inﬂuence outcomes, at different levels of analysis. Cross-level designs have only been previously
used to examine how psychological safety at the team-level predicts individual-level outcomes (Walumbwa & Schaubroeck, 2009),
and how psychological safety at the team level interacts with individual-level variables to predict team outcomes (Liu et al., 2014).
    We call on researchers to conduct additional research to improve our understanding of how variables at different levels of analysis
interact to predict psychological safety. Better understanding of how cultural, organizational, and team-level factors combine to predict
the development of psychological safety will enable organizations to design effective work environments and practices that assist indi-
viduals and teams to work effectively. For example, scrutinizing cross-level effects of organizational-level variables, future research may
investigate whether the inﬂuence of positive leadership behaviors (e.g., transformational or participative leadership; Yukl, 2002) on
team-level psychological safety (team-level variables) is stronger or weaker when the organization has human resource (HR) practices
in place that facilitate employee voice or involvement (e.g., Holland, Pyman, Cooper, & Teicher, 2011). On one hand, we might expect HR
practices that enable “direct voice” (e.g., regular meetings with senior management or quality circles; Holland et al., 2011) to trigger pos-
itive leadership effects on team-level psychological safety by enabling employee engagement or involvement. In other words, transfor-
mational and participative leadership might only have a positive inﬂuence on psychological safety when the organizational environment
is supportive of such leadership styles. On the other hand, it might also be argued that HR practices that facilitate employee voice or en-
gagement will substitute for leader inﬂuence. In other words, in the absence of transformational or participative leadership, such HR prac-
tices may have a greater inﬂuence on psychological safety than where there is a transformational or participative leader.
    Future research might also explore same-level direct effects of organizational-level antecedents on organizational-level psycho-
logical safety. Indeed, our review suggests that psychological safety and its antecedents are routinely scrutinized at the individual
or team levels; yet, similar ﬁndings might also be expected at the organizational level. Thus, future research might focus on HR prac-
tices that engender direct voice arrangements (Holland et al., 2011), empowerment (e.g., structures and procedures that encourage
initiative-taking; Seibert, Silver, & Randolph, 2004), employee discretion and group collaboration (“high involvement” HR practices;
Batt & Colvin, 2011) as antecedents of psychological safety at the organizational level, given that such practices are likely to provide a
shared structure of cooperation that facilitates the willing contribution of information among organizational members.

5. Conclusion

    To conclude, we believe that psychological safety is important given it is a key cognitive state that allows learning processes to
occur, and contributes to improved work outcomes at different levels of analysis (Edmondson, 1999; Edmondson et al., 2007).
From a practical perspective, this review has highlighted the myriad of positive workplace outcomes associated with psychological
safety that indicate to managers the importance of engaging in supportive leadership behaviors, fostering bonds between team
members, and leveraging supportive organizational practices to build psychological safety at work. Due to the importance of psy-
chological safety for organizations today, research that helps us to understand the antecedents of psychological safety, and how
and when psychological safety contributes to work outcomes, is important for individuals, teams, and organizations alike. Through
offering suggestions to advance theoretical understanding of psychological safety and opportunities for advancing empirical re-
search, we hope this review will stimulate future research.

                                               A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535                                                     533


References

Ames, D. R., & Flynn, F. J. (2007). What breaks a leader: The curvilinear relation between assertiveness and leadership. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9,
     307–324.
Anderson, N., & West, M. (1994). The Team Climate Inventory. Windsor, UK: Berks ASE.
Baer, M., & Frese, M. (2003). Innovation is not enough: Climates for initiative and psychological safety, process innovations, and firm performance. Journal of
     Organizational Behavior, 24, 45–68.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Batt, R., & Colvin, A. (2011). An employment systems approach to turnover: HR practices, quits, dismissals, and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 54, 695–717.
Bendoly, E. (2014). System dynamics understanding in projects: Information sharing, psychological safety, and performance effects. Production and Operations
     Management, 23, 1352–1369.
Bergmann, B., & Schaeppi, J. (2016). A data-driven approach to group creativity. Harvard Business Review, 12th July 2016.
Bienefeld, N., & Grote, G. (2014). Speaking up in ad hoc multiteam systems: Individual level effects of psychological safety, status, and leadership within and across
     teams. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 23, 930–945.
Bradley, B. H., Postlethwaite, B. E., Klotz, A. C., Hamdani, M. R., & Brown, K. G. (2012). Reaping the benefits of task conflict in teams: The critical role of team psycho-
     logical safety climate. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 151–158.
Bresman, H., & Zellmer-Bruhn, M. (2013). The structural context of team learning: Effects of organizational and team structure on internal and external learning.
     Organization Science, 24, 1120–1139.
Brinsfield, C. T. (2013). Employee silence motives: Investigation of dimensionality and development of measures. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 34, 671–697.
Brown, S. P., & Leigh, T. W. (1996). A new look at psychological climate and its relationship to job involvement, effort, and performance. Journal of Applied Psychology,
     81, 358–368.
Brueller, D., & Carmeli, A. (2011). Linking capacities of high-quality relationships to team learning and performance in service organizations. Human Resource
     Management, 50, 455–477.
Bstieler, L., & Hemmert, M. (2010). Increasing learning and time efficiency in interorganizational new product development teams. Journal of Product Innovation
     Management, 27, 485–499.
Bunderson, J. S., & Boumgarden, P. (2010). Structure and learning in self-managed teams: Why “bureaucratic” teams can be better learners. Organization Science, 21,
     609–624.
Burris, E. R., Rodgers, M. S., Mannix, E. A., Hendron, M. G., & Oldroyd, J. B. (2009). Playing favorites: The influence of leaders' inner circle on group processes and per-
     formance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 1244–1257.
Byrne, Z. S., Stoner, J., Thompson, K. R., & Hockwarter, W. (2005). The interactive effects of conscientiousness, work effort, and psychological climate on job perfor-
     mance. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 66, 326–338.
Carmeli, A. (2007). Social capital, psychological safety and learning behaviours from failure in organisations. Long Range Planning, 40, 30–44.
Carmeli, A., & Gittell, J. H. (2009). High-quality relationships, psychological safety, and learning from failures in work organizations. Journal of Organizational Behavior,
     30, 709–729.
Carmeli, A., & Zisu, M. (2009). The relational underpinnings of quality internal auditing in medical clinics in Israel. Social Science and Medicine, 68, 894–902.
Carmeli, A., Brueller, D., & Dutton, J. E. (2009). Learning behaviours in the workplace: The role of high-quality interpersonal relationships and psychological safety.
     Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 26, 81–98.
Carmeli, A., Reiter-Palmon, R., & Ziv, E. (2010). Inclusive leadership and employee involvement in creative tasks in the workplace: The mediating role of psychological
     safety. Creativity Research Journal, 22, 250–260.
Chandrasekaran, A., & Mishra, A. (2012). Task design, team context, and psychological safety: An empirical analysis of R&D projects in high technology organizations.
     Production and Operations Management, 21, 977–996.
Chen, G., & Tjosvold, D. (2012). Shared rewards and goal interdependence for psychological safety among departments in China. Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 29,
     433–452.
Chen, C., Liao, J., & Wen, P. (2014). Why does formal mentoring matter? The mediating role of psychological safety and the moderating role of power distance orien-
     tation in the Chinese context. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 25, 1112–1130.
Choo, A., Linderman, K., & Schroeder, R. G. (2007). Social and method effects on learning behaviors and knowledge creation in six sigma projects. Management Science,
     53, 437–450.
Chrobot-Mason, D., & Aramovich, N. (2004). Employee perceptions of an affirming climate for diversity and its link to attitudinal outcomes: A comparison of racial and gen-
     der groups. Paper presented at Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, New Orleans, LA.
De Clercq, D., & Rius, I. B. (2007). Organizational commitment in Mexican small and medium-sized firms: The role of work status, organizational climate, and entre-
     preneurial orientation. Journal of Small Business Management, 45, 467–490.
Detert, J. R., & Burris, E. R. (2007). Leadership behavior and employee voice: Is the door really open? Academy of Management Journal, 50, 869–884.
DeVellis, R. F. (2003). Scale development: Theory and application (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Duncan, T. E., & Duncan, S. C. (2004). An introduction to latent growth curve modeling. Behavior Therapy, 35, 333–363.
Edmondson, A. C. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44, 350–383.
Edmondson, A. C., & Lei, Z. (2014). Psychological safety: The history, renaissance, and future of an interpersonal construct. The Annual Review of Organizational
     Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 1, 23–43.
Edmondson, A. C., & Mogelof, J. P. (2005). Explaining psychological safety in innovation teams. In L. Thompson, & H. Choi (Eds.), Creativity and innovation in organiza-
     tions (pp. 109–136). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Press.
Edmondson, A. C., & Woolley, A. (2003). Understanding outcomes of organizational learning interventions. In M. Easterby-Smith, & M. Lyles (Eds.), International hand-
     book on organizational learning and knowledge management. London: Blackwell.
Edmondson, A. C., Bohmer, R. M., & Pisano, G. P. (2001). Disrupted routines: Team learning and new technology implementation in hospitals. Administrative Science
     Quarterly, 46, 685–716.
Edmondson, A. C., Dillon, J. R., & Roloff, K. S. (2007). Three perspectives on team learning: Outcome improvement, task mastery, and group process. Academy of
     Management Annals, 1, 269–314.
Faraj, S., & Yan, A. M. (2009). Boundary work in knowledge teams. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 604–617.
Frazier, M. L., Fainshmidt, S., Klinger, R. L., Pezeshkan, A., & Vracheva, V. (2016). Psychological safety: A meta-analytic review and extension. Personnel Psychology.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/peps.12183 (in press).
Friedman, R., Chi, S. C., & Liu, L. A. (2006). An expectancy model of Chinese–American differences in conflict-avoiding. Journal of International Business Studies, 37, 76–91.
Gibson, C. B., & Gibbs, J. L. (2006). Unpacking the concept of virtuality: The effects of geographic dispersion, electronic dependence, dynamic structure, and national
     diversity on team innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 51, 451–495.
González-Romá, V., Fortes-Ferreira, L., & Peiró, J. M. (2009). Team climate, climate strength and team performance. A longitudinal study. Journal of Occupational and
     Organizational Psychology, 82, 511–536.
Gu, Q., Wang, G. G., & Wang, L. (2013). Social capital and innovation in R&D teams: The mediating roles of psychological safety and learning from mistakes. R&D
     Management, 43, 89–102.
Halbesleben, J. R. B., & Rathert, C. (2008). The role of continuous quality improvement and psychological safety in predicting work-arounds. Health Care Management
     Review, 33, 134–144.
Halbesleben, J. R. B., Neveu, J. P., Paustian-Underdahl, S. C., & Westman, M. (2014). Getting to the “COR”: Understanding the role of resources in conservation of re-
     sources theory. Journal of Management, 40, 1334–1364.

534                                            A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535

Hawcroft, L. J., & Milfont, T. L. (2010). The use (and abuse) of the new environmental paradigm scale over the last 30 years: A meta-analysis. Journal of Environmental
     Psychology, 30, 143–158.
Hetzner, S., Gartmeier, M., Heid, H., & Gruber, H. (2011). Error orientation and reflection at work. Vocations and Learning, 4, 25–39.
Hirak, R., Pang, A. C., Carmeli, A., & Schaubroeck, J. M. (2012). Linking leader inclusiveness to work unit performance: The importance of psychological safety and learn-
     ing from failures. The Leadership Quarterly, 23, 107–117.
Hobfoll, S. E. (1989). Conservation of resources. A new attempt at conceptualizing stress. American Psychologist, 44, 513–524.
Hobfoll, S. E. (2011). Conservation of resource caravans and engaged settings. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 84, 116–122.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture's consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations across nations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Holland, P., Pyman, A., Cooper, B. K., & Teicher, J. (2011). Employee voice and job satisfaction in Australia: The centrality of direct voice. Human Resource Management,
     50, 95–111.
Huang, C. C., & Jiang, P. C. (2012). Exploring the psychological safety of R&D teams: An empirical analysis in Taiwan. Journal of Management & Organization, 18,
     175–192.
Kahn, W. A. (1990). Psychological conditions of personal engagement and disengagement at work. Academy of Management Journal, 33, 692–724.
Kark, R., & Carmeli, A. (2009). Alive and creating: The mediating role of vitality and aliveness in the relationship between psychological safety and creative work in-
     volvement. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 785–804.
Kayes, D. C. (2006). From climbing stairs to riding waves - Group critical thinking and its development. Small Group Research, 37, 612–630.
Kessel, M., Kratzer, J., & Schultz, C. (2012). Psychological safety, knowledge sharing, and creative performance in healthcare teams. Creativity and Innovation
     Management, 21, 147–157.
Kirkman, B. L., Cordery, J. L., Mathieu, J., Rosen, B., & Kukenberger, M. (2013). Global organizational communities of practice: The effects of nationality diversity, psy-
     chological safety, and media richness on community performance. Human Relations, 66, 333–362.
Kostopoulos, K. S., & Bozionelos, N. (2011). Team exploratory and exploitative learning: Psychological safety, task conflict, and team performance. Group & Organization
     Management, 36, 385–415.
Langfred, C. W. (2004). Too much of a good thing? Negative effects of high trust and individual autonomy in self-managing teams. Academy of Management Journal, 47,
     385–399.
Lau, D. C., & Murnighan, J. K. (2005). Interactions within groups and subgroups: The effects of demographic faultlines. Academy of Management Journal, 48, 645–659.
Lee, J. Y., Swink, M., & Pandejpong, T. (2011). The roles of worker expertise, information sharing quality, and psychological safety in manufacturing process innovation:
     An intellectual capital perspective. Production and Operations Management, 20, 556–570.
Leroy, H., Dierynck, B., Anseel, F., Simons, T., Halbesleben, J. R. B., & McCaughey, D. (2012). Behavioral integrity for safety, priority of safety, psychological safety, and
     patient safety: A team-level study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 1273–1281.
Li, A. N., & Tan, H. H. (2012). What happens when you trust your supervisor? Mediators of individual performance in trust relationships. Journal of Organizational
     Behavior, 34, 407–425.
Li, N., & Yan, J. (2009). The effects of trust climate on individual performance. Frontiers of Business Research in China, 3, 27–49.
Liang, J., Farh, C. I. C., & Farh, J. L. (2012). Psychological antecedents of promotive and prohibitive voice: A two-wave examination. Academy of Management Journal, 55,
     71–92.
Liu, W., Zhu, R., & Yang, Y. (2010). I warn you because I like you: Voice behavior, employee identifications, and transformational leadership. The Leadership Quarterly,
     21, 189–202.
Liu, S., Hu, J., Li, Y., Wang, Z., & Lin, X. (2014). Examining the cross-level relationship between shared leadership and learning in teams: Evidence from China. The
     Leadership Quarterly, 25, 282–295.
Madjar, N., & Ortiz-Walters, R. (2009). Trust in supervisors and trust in customers: Their independent, relative, and joint effects on employee performance and crea-
     tivity. Human Performance, 22, 128–142.
Martins, L. L., Schilpzand, M. C., Kirkman, B. L., Ivanaj, S., & Ivanaj, V. (2013). A contingency view of the effects of cognitive diversity on team performance: The mod-
     erating roles of team psychological safety and relationship conflict. Small Group Research, 44, 96–126.
May, D. R., Gilson, R. L., & Harter, L. M. (2004). The psychological conditions of meaningfulness, safety and availability and the engagement of the human spirit at work.
     Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 77, 11–37.
Morrison, E. W., & Phelps, C. C. (1999). Taking charge at work: Extrarole efforts to initiate workplace change. Academy of Management Journal, 42, 403–419.
Mu, S. H., & Gnyawali, D. R. (2003). Developing synergistic knowledge in student groups. Journal of Higher Education, 74, 689–711.
Nemanich, L. A., & Vera, D. (2009). Transformational leadership and ambidexterity in the context of an acquisition. The Leadership Quarterly, 20, 19–33.
Nembhard, I. M., & Edmondson, A. (2006). Making it safe: The effects of leader inclusiveness and professional status on psychological safety and improvement efforts
     in health care teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 27, 941–966.
Nembhard, I. M., & Edmondson, A. C. (2011). Psychological safety: A foundation for speaking up, collaboration, and experimentation. In K. S. Cameron, & G. M. Spreitzer
     (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of positive organizational scholarship. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O'Neill, O. A. (2009). Workplace expression of emotions and escalation of commitment. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39, 2396–2424.
Ortega, A., Sanchez-Manzanares, M., Gil, F., & Rico, R. (2010). Team learning and effectiveness in virtual project teams: The role of beliefs about interpersonal context.
     Spanish Journal of Psychology, 13, 267–276.
Ortega, A., Van den Bossche, P., Sanchez-Manzanares, M., Rico, R., & Gil, F. (2014). The influence of change-oriented leadership and psychological safety on team learn-
     ing in healthcare teams. Journal of Business and Psychology, 29, 311–321.
Palanski, M. E., & Vogelgesang, G. R. (2011). Virtuous creativity: The effects of leader behavioural integrity on follower creative thinking and risk taking. Canadian
     Journal of Administrative Sciences, 28, 259–269.
Pearsall, M. J., & Ellis, A. P. J. (2011). Thick as thieves: The effects of ethical orientation and psychological safety on unethical team behaviour. Journal of Applied
     Psychology, 96, 401–411.
Peltokorpi, V. (2004). Transactive memory directories in small work units. Personnel Review, 33, 446–467.
Pierce, J. R., & Aguinis, H. (2013). The too-much-of-a-good-thing effect in management. Journal of Management, 39, 313–338.
Post, C. (2012). Deep-level team composition and innovation: The mediating roles of psychological safety and cooperative learning. Group & Organization Management,
     37, 555–585.
Rathert, C., Ishqaidef, G., & May, D. R. (2009). Improving work environments in health care: Test of a theoretical framework. Health Care Management Review, 34,
     334–343.
Roberto, M. A. (2002). Lessons from Everest: The interaction of cognitive bias, psychological safety and system complexity. California Management Review, 45, 136–158.
Roussin, C. J. (2008). Increasing trust, psychological safety, and team performance through dyadic leadership discovery. Small Group Research, 39, 224–248.
Roussin, C. J., & Webber, S. S. (2012). Impact of organizational identification and psychological safety on initial perceptions of co-worker trustworthiness. Journal of
     Business and Psychology, 27, 317–329.
Roussin, C. J., MacLean, T. L., & Rudolph, J. W. (2016). The safety in unsafe teams: A multilevel approach to team psychological safety. Journal of Management, 42,
     1409–1433.
Sanner, B., & Bunderson, J. S. (2013). Psychological safety, learning, and performance: A comparison of direct and contingent effects. Presented at the Academy of Manage-
     ment Conference, Orlando, FL.
Schaubroeck, J., Lam, S. S. K., & Peng, A. C. Y. (2011). Cognition-based and affect-based trust as mediators of leader behavior influences on team performance. Journal of
     Applied Psychology, 96, 863–871.
Schein, E. H., & Bennis, W. (1965). Personal and organizational change through group methods. New York: Wiley.
Schneider, B., Salvaggio, A. N., & Subirats, M. (2002). Climate strength: A new direction for climate research. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 220–229.
Schulte, M., Cohen, N. A., & Klein, K. J. (2012). The coevolution of network ties and perceptions of team psychological safety. Organization Science, 23, 564–581.
Schwab, D. P. (1980). Construct validity in organizational behavior. Research in Organizational Behavior, 2, 3–43.

                                              A. Newman et al. / Human Resource Management Review 27 (2017) 521–535                                                   535

Seibert, S. E., Silver, S. R., & Randolph, W. A. (2004). Taking empowerment to the next level: A multiple-level model of empowerment, performance, and satisfaction.
    Academy of Management Journal, 47, 332–349.
Short, J. (2009). The art of writing a review article. Journal of Management, 35, 1312–1317.
Siemsen, E., Roth, A. V., Balasubramanian, S., & Anand, G. (2009). The influence of psychological safety and confidence in knowledge on employee knowledge sharing.
    Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 11, 429–447.
Singh, B., & Winkel, D. E. (2012). Racial differences in helping behaviors: The role of respect, safety, and identification. Journal of Business Ethics, 106, 467–477.
Singh, B., Winkel, D. E., & Selvarajan, T. T. (2013). Managing diversity at work: Does psychological safety hold the key to racial differences in employee performance?
    Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 86, 242–263.
Stalmeijer, R. E., Gijselaers, W. H., Wolfhagen, I., Harendza, S., & Scherpbier, A. (2007). How interdisciplinary teams can create multi-disciplinary education: The inter-
    play between team processes and educational quality. Medical Education, 41, 1059–1066.
Tangirala, S., Kamdar, S., Venkataramani, V., & Parke, M. R. (2013). Doing right versus getting ahead: The effects of duty and achievement orientations on employees'
    voice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 1040–1050.
Tett, R. P., & Guterman, A. H. (2000). Situation trait relevance, trait, expression, and cross-situational consistency: Testing a principle of trait activation. Journal of
    Research in Personality, 34, 397–423.
Tucker, A. L. (2007). An empirical study of system improvement by frontline employees in hospital units. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 9,
    492–505.
Tucker, A. L., Nembhard, I. M., & Edmondson, A. C. (2007). Implementing new practices: An empirical study of organizational learning in hospital intensive care units.
    Management Science, 53, 894–907.
Tynan, R. (2005). The effects of threat sensitivity and face giving on dyadic psychological safety and upward communication. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 35,
    223–247.
Ulloa, B. C. R., & Adams, S. G. (2004). Attitude toward teamwork and effective teaming. Team Performance Management, 10, 145–151.
Van den Bossche, P., Gijselaers, W. H., Segers, M., & Kirschner, P. A. (2006). Social and cognitive factors driving teamwork in collaborative learning environments: Team
    learning beliefs and behaviors. Small Group Research, 37, 490–521.
Van Dyne, L., & LePine, J. A. (1998). Helping and voice extra-role behaviors: Evidence of construct and predictive validity. Academy of Management Journal, 41, 108–119.
Walumbwa, F. O., & Schaubroeck, J. (2009). Leader personality traits and employee voice behavior: Mediating roles of ethical leadership and work group psychological
    safety. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 1275–1286.
West, M. A. (1990). The social psychology of innovation in groups. In M. A. West, & J. L. Farr (Eds.), Innovation and creativity at work: Psychological and organizational
    strategies (pp. 309–333). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Whetzel, D. L., McDaniel, M. A., Yost, A. P., & Kim, N. (2010). Linearity of personality–performance relationships: A large-scale examination. International Journal of
    Selection and Assessment, 18, 310–320.
Wilkens, R., & London, M. (2006). Relationships between climate, process, and performance in continuous quality improvement groups. Journal of Vocational Behavior,
    69, 510–523.
Wong, A., Tjosvold, D., & Lu, J. (2010). Leadership values and learning in China: The mediating role of psychological safety. Asia-Pacific Journal of Human Resources, 48,
    86–107.
Xu, Y., & Yang, Y. (2010). Student learning in business simulation: An empirical investigation. Journal of Education for Business, 85, 223–228.
Yukl, G. (2002). Leadership in organizations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Zhang, Y. X., Fang, Y. L., Wei, K. K., & Chen, H. P. (2010). Exploring the role of psychological safety in promoting the intention to continue sharing knowledge in virtual
    communities. International Journal of Information Management, 30, 425–436.

